Retrovision Presents Jeff Minter's

a
ETT of the Beast

the LLamasoft Newsletter

Issues1to10 FER

 

—a oe

 

the LLAMASOFT newsletter

First Hairy ‘Isstic...)une 1984

1: What is this anyway?

You may well ask. In fact we thought it would be a good
idea to do some kind of newsletter in order to keep track of high
scores in games, warn you about any new releases and generally
give out interesting bits of info about whatever comes into my
head at the ime. We don't intend to lay any heavy advertising
on you, we assume that if you're reading this you'll have made
your own conclusions about the games.

If you beat any of the scores we're going to give later in
this newsletter, write in with details and we'll update the list
whenever I get round to doing another one of these.

 

2: New Releases

SHEEP IN SPACE - my most recent release for the C64. This
is loosely based around a Defender-style scrolling planetary
surface. The difference is that we have two surfaces, one at the
base of the screen in traditional fashion, and one inverted at the

base of the screen in traditional fashion, and one inverted at the
top. The sheep flies in the space between the two planets, and
may land in fields on either planet to graze when the stomach
status becomes uncomfortable. Speed is controlled in a unique
manner, being dependant upon your height above the planetary
surfaces. Flying close to either ‘ground’ slows you down (handy
for landings), whilst flying in the centre of the screen
equidistant from the surfaces gives maximum velocity. Your
mission, should you decide to accept it, is to rid your planets of
the various nasties inhabiting them. To this end you can fire
Bonios of Doom (well that’s what they look like!) at your various
assailants. These weapons are attracted by the gravity of the
planets, and this must be taken into account when you aim.

Just to make life unpleasant, several of these nasties gang
up to steal energy from your power stations. Glowing with the
energy, they race to charge up their Planetbuster gun, which if
allowed to reach full charge, will blow up your planet. You
should therefore give priority to the destructjop of Charge
Carriers

There is a large ‘cast of characters’ introduced gradually
during the first 21 levels, and a total of 48 levels of difficuity
The game is quite complex to learn, but rewarding to play well,
requiring not only accurate blasting but also a certain amount of
strategic planning as you attempt to keep your planet intact and
your sheep alive.

If you like a challenging and different blast, this is a good
one to have. If you're looking to play Defender though, don't get
this, because although at first glance it looks a little like the
Williams classic, the gameplay and strategy is totally different.
If you want to play Defender get Alligata’s Guardian, which is a
pretty good clone.

METAGALACTIC LLAMAS BATTLE AT THE EDGE OF TIME is
a C64 conversion of my original Vic20 game with the same
bizarre name. Programmed by Aaron Liddiment, a friend of
mine who'll be doing some more Llamasoft conversions later, the
game has been improved with better graphics and given a fancy
intro page and high score table. Two-player mode is also
available on the new version.

For those who haven't seen the Vic version of the game, it
is an unusual variation of the ‘shoot-em-up’ variety. Under your
command is a llama at the bottom of the screen. You cause this
to move left and right with your joystick, and by pressing the
FIRE button you can make the beast spit. Moving the stick up
and down controls a horizontal force field in the upper portion of
the screen. By bouncing expectoration off the walls and the
force fieid you can plug the nasty Arachnids (well actually

spiders) which descend on threads from the top of the screen.
If left unzapped, these eventually drop off their webs and land,
mutating into weevils and crawling towards you in a disgusting
manner. Zapping the Weevils requires clever spit-deflection.

This game gets harder in a simple way. more of the same,
but faster. Don’t get this if you want the variety of lifeforms
you had in Revenge. If you want a simple but oddly compulsive
zap, do try this. It’s fun.

ATTACK OF THE MUTANT CAMELS is now available on the
Atari. This is my first Atari game for some time, and I'm very
pleased with the result. All the features of the C64 original are
there, plus a few extras, and the whole is played out over one of
the most beautiful backdrops Ive ever seen on a game. I'm not
just blowing my own trumpet here, do get a look at the game if
“youcan. The Atari’s tremendous colour capability enabled me to
get a lovely ‘sunset’ effect which will knock your eyeballs out.

Gameplay is improved over the C64 original, with totally
smooth scrolling and full ship inertia added, plus some nice
‘Robotron-style’ explosion effects. The game is still the simple
‘laser the camels and jump to lightspeed’ job, simple yet
addictive, and fits into any of the Atari models. The Ataris have
been neglected by all in England with the exception of people
like English and Starcade, which is a shame because they have
amazing potential for game design. Watch this space for future
developments!

 

3: Game Development Tools

I often get asked what kind of development systems I use
to write the games, so I’m going to run through the various stuff
I use during the creation of a game.

I certainly do not subscribe to the ‘we've got a Sage IV and
300 programmers’ school of thought which seems so common
with the large, breadhead software houses. I really prefer to
work on the target machine; I don't really care if it takes longer
because I never work to deadlines anyway.

On the C64 I've been using the Commodore
Assembler/Editor package, disk-based on a pair of 4040 twin
drives interfaced through an Interpod interface. I use the 4040s
because my 1541 really can't stand the constant hammering
which repeated assemblies give the drives. The 4040s are built
like tanks and never go down, but they are very SLOW!!! I’m
just now starting to use a new system, assembling on an Apple II

which has faster ‘drives, and shoving the ‘code into the 64 for
test and debug: It’s the slow speed of the drives which drove
me to the Apple rather than any deficiencies in the AE package,
which has its quirks but usually works.

For graphics I use SPED and CHRED, utilities provided on
the Commodore development disk. These are straightforward
sprite and character editors. For debug I use the old Commodore
ML monitor, of which I have various copies at various addresses.

On the Atari I use the MAC/65 assembler cartridge in my
800, coupled with two 610 drives. MAC/65 is very fast and also
has a nice debugger. If you choose addresses carefully you can
run your object code without harming your source, which is nice,
because you can just flick back and forth between the two,
editing and re-assembling in a few seconds.

Also essential to program development are the following:
my laser audio and video systems, the fridge in the corner with
all the Coke in it, a daily run, the Tempest machine and the Star
Wars cockpit machine, not being interrupted by the telephone,
and Star Raiders on the Atari.

 

I'll keep this bit brief, ‘cos I don’t want to give the
impression that I get a kick out of writing about myself. But for
those who are interested, a brief summary follows:

Jeff Minter: about 6 foot 1, hairy, University drop-out, into
camels, llamas, sheep & goats. Started to teach myself games
design and programming between A-levels at 6th form. Likes
Python and ‘The Young Ones’ (favourite character Neil). Into

Floyd, Genesis, Roger Waters, Steve Hillage, Rush, Camel, Led Zep,

Marillion, more Pink Floyd, and more which I'll probably kick
myself later for not putting in. Favourite video game Star
Raiders on the Atari. Dislikes current heavy commercialisation
of the games scene, and ‘competitive’ attitude of some software
firms. (I'm no more competing with anyone than Floyd are with,
say, Genesis or Marillion}. Enjoyed University despite getting
the boot, and miss the social life (being a programmer is like
being a hermit!). Really quite an average human being and nota
silicon whizz-kid at all (thank God!). Reads Fat Freddie’s Cat and
tons of science fiction. Writes weird video games.

5. Future Projects

I have just started a new C64 game about which I can't say
much at the moment for obvious reasons, except that I hope to
have a proto at least running in time for the PCW show in
September, and I'd really like to have it finished before | go on
holiday to Peru. I'm giving up left/right scrolling for a bit, ‘cos
suddenly it seems that every C64 programmer and his dog are
doing the smooth scroll bit, and I’m peeved off with it. The
resulting game should appeal to anyone with a taste for the
bizarre. Maybe I'll leak some more details closer to completion
time! Meanwhile rest assured that the Apple is getting a good
pounding every day, I'm swearing when the bugs creep in, and
the cat is warming its arse on the disk drives- usual work
conditions for me!

6: High Scores.

Grisvunter.....501,880 lebel 18 Vain fenton
Hell Gate... 430,000 Iefel 19 Met!

Revenge  .....2,000,000+ Wik tolwt
Laser Zone .....120,000 fl. Spall
Attack a... 135,248 Jain Fenton
Sheep/SHpace....1, 173,913 Stebe Kellet

Doubtiess these are all out of date by now, so let us know your

best. We've heard of level 15 being reached on Hover Bovver but
don’t know the score!! Aliso does anyone have a legitimate
MATRIX score??

7: Whatever...

Learning Machine Code... | used PROGRAMMING THE 6502
by Rodnay Zaks as a good 6502 book, and used the VIC and 64
Programmers Reference Guides for each machine. The VIC
REVEALED is also good for VIC20 owners. On the Atari, DE RE
ATARI is expensive but essential. Treat yourself to a good
assembler and a disk drive if you're serious about doing a lot of
“code.

Good Games not by the Beast... Alligata’s GUARDIAN is a
brilliant Defender... Rabbit do the best Scramble... ENCOUNTER by
Novagen is Battlezone but better... Task Set stuff usually good,
my faves are Pipeline and Gyropod... Quicksilva’s BOOGABOO is
nice, really weird... FLIGHT SIM II- expensive but very good...
Anirog Time Pilot is a good copy of the arcade one... Alligata
LOCO is a good arcade copy, very pretty but a touch repetitive,
buy it for the Jean-Michel Jarre... More of these next time..rest
assured these are good, they're the ones I dig out when I needa
rest from my own!

 

© and all that heavy breadhead bit 1984 Jeff Minter.

Correspondance, high scores, ierge sume of money, marriage proposals etc. should be sent to us
here ol 49 Mount Pleapont, Tedley. Hents RG26 6BN, Special greetings from Yok the Hoiry to the 3
Toed Sloth... Rory will feature in the next one... ‘Te’ to whoever sent me that enonymous disk... and
hairy ¢reetinge to ali fore of our beselly gsmes.

the Nature of the Beast

REE

the LLAMASOFT newsletter

Second Shaggy Issue...September 1984

1: ANCIPITAL: the latest C64 game

{ have now completed the C64 project 1 mentioned in the last
newsletter. The resultant 50-odd K of program and data will be released at
the PCW show in London this month.

It is difficult to categorize this game. You might call it an arcade
adventure, but the very word adventure’ tends to put off hardened arcade
blast freaks. Certainly, there are elements of adventure in the game (you
need a map to play best, you collect things) but there is even more ‘arcade’
stuff than there was in Revenge.

The basic idea behind the game came from watching stuff like Atic Atac
and Sabre Wulf. Both these games feature large maps and plenty of action,
but there doesn't seem 10 be a great variety of actual attackers; seldom
more than about 20-odd different hostiles throughout the whole game.

What I set out to do was create a large map, With doors and Keys in the
manner of an adventure, bul to present in each room a completely
different attack wave in the manner of Revenge. The waves should be
more complex than the Revenge ones, should appeal to zap’em nuts and
rather than the standard knight/explorer/detective adventure scenario, |
wanted psychedelic surrealism and general out-to-lunchness.

The resultant game I like to call a ‘progressive arcade game’ rather than
an adventure. There are 100 rooms laid out in a 10x10 grid, and six keys
{which look like camels) open up various watls within the map. There are
goats to collect which give you special powers. There is plenty gravity (1 do
love pseudo-grav routines!) in 4 planes, so you can run and jump on the
walls and ceiling. ] wrote a Phil Collins module so each room has its own
distinctive drum rhythm backing. Even the firing noise changes from room
to room. The waves themselves are created by a more advanced core
module than that used in Revenge, and subsequently have more variety.

Some are pure shoot-em-up, whereas others require a fittle thought.
Pressing 'H’ whilst in a room pauses the game and displays three lines of
Help text if you can't figure out what to do. There is a starry background
for no other reason than 1o look good, and some [freaky strobo effects. You
get plenty of lives, and opportunities within the game to Win some more.
Doubtless if I lived in Liverpool I'd start calling it a Megagame but you
know I don't go for all that hype bit. I just think it’s a nice origina! chunk
of kilobytes that you won't conquer in five minutes.

The star of the game, the Key Figure, is the Ancipital. Those of you who
have Sheep in Space will recognize the Ancipital as that harassed-looking
fittle half-man, half-goat creature which scuttles across the planetary
surface, and which you did your best to Bonio. He actually originated from
my reading of Brian Aldiss’s Helliconia stories, which are ace (read them
for more background on the ancipital race). The poor creatures are always
getting killed and enslaved, shot, speared, drowned and chucked off cliffs
by the humans, so | thought I'd make them the heroes in this latest game.

If there is any single specific villain in the game it must be Rory the
Vicious Guinea Pig who has been known lo savage an Ancipital to death.
He crops up throughout the game in such attack waves as Rory on the
Attack, Rory Plays Guitar, Rory on a CND March and several more.
Never has a cuter-looking sprite been so vicious. I’m sure he'll soon be
your favourite Ancipital enemy!

My best to date is 89% and about 3.6 million (it says fess in the
instructions, but I've played more games since then). We're also making
use of the new Novaload audio-visual fast loader, which is more
interesting than our old Turbo system.

Anyway if you want a good heavy blast, but also a nice bit of strategy
and forward planning, then Ancipital is a pretty good bet. Be warned,
though: as with a lot of my games, you won't pick it up in five minutes.
Learning to function well under the 4-gravity system will take you a little

We now have the conversion of Hover Bovver running on 32k and over
ATARI machines. The character graphics and feel’ of the game are
virtually identical to the C64 version, but you haven't got a multicoloured
neighbour due to limitations of PMG. Still, there are advantages, such as
4-channe! sound instead of only 3, and some very colourfu! hi-score and
intro screens thanks to Atari's unsurpassed colour generation. Everything
is there, from the ‘English Country Garden’ theme to the sounds of dog
barks and mower noise.

] must say that the more I see and work with Atari, the more | like it.
The potential of the machine is enormous, and the colour effects knock out
your eyebaijlsi At the moment Atari owners are a rare but dedicated

breed, and there isn't a lot of good, cheap software about. However, due to
recent developments this may all change soon; Jack Tramiel has just
taken over Atari, and also Atari have a new graphics chip, MARIE, which
makes GI[A seem tame. Reports from the American press, where the new
chip has been seen in the 7800 video game from Atari, say that the new
chip is capable of generating unlimited (get that!!) sprites... With
potential like that, if built into a low-cost 64k micro (which Tramiel! is very
likely to do, to compete directly with the C64) no sane game designer is
gcing to be able to resist it! Imagine Revenge of the Mutant Camels
done using, say, 80 sprites plus all of Atari's amazing colours..... ATARI
owners may be the obscure ones now, but in a year's time maybe things
will be different!

 

3: This

Some of you have asked how this newsletter was produced. | use an
Apple Macintosh micro to produce the whole thing. The text is laid out
using the Macwrite utility, and the pictures are drawn using Macpaint.
This graphics program is so good that even I can produce reasonable
graphics using il, and I can’t draw at all well using paper! Macpaint allows
you to use pencil, paintbrush or spraygun, cut shapes out and move them
around, add text, and generally do just about anything with a picture you
want. Pictures can then be ‘stuck into’ the word-processor text wherever
you want them. Once complete the whole is sent to the Imagewriter
printer, and then the whole lot is reproduced exactly as it came off the
printer. The Mac is very easy and enjoyable to work with; pity that the
graphics aren't in colour too!

4: Stick of Joy

| often get asked which joysticks 1 would recommend to players of my
games. Joysticks are, like games, very much a matter of individual taste.
My own personal favourite is the Competetion-Pro, the one with two
FIRE buttons, Although it’s not the most comfortable joystick, it is very
sensitive and above ail, it lasts! 1 usually take these sticks to shows where
they receive a really heavy pounding, and out of the five or six I've had for
over a year, the only one that no longer works is the one which was
chewed up by the dog.

For those who like a tabletop joystick as opposed to a hand-held, the Fire
Command is pretty good. This has a large heavy metal base with the stick
in the middle and two FIRE buttons, one each for left- and right-handers. |
find this good for out-and-out blasters like AMC and Matrix, and also for
the extended pounding of a game of Decathlon.

Also worthy of mention are the Arcade, which performs much like the
Competition-Pro but with a single centraliy-located FIRE button. The
Quickshot // is quite fun if you stick it down to a table and play
one-handed (the two FIRE buttons are operated by the hand grasping the
stick). You can switch in a Rapid-Fire option which allows you to totally
annihilate games which normally require repeated button presses, such
as Defender and Vanguard on the Atari, and Caverns of Mars and
Abductor on the Vic. This stick feefs very chunky and ‘macho’, but it does
get wrenched around when stuck to the table and | wonder how long it
would last - after a couple of weeks mine started to creak ominously!

If you're rich and like Gridrunner, Matrix or Atari Missile Command
then you might like the Wico Trackball. This is strong and ideally suited
to the aforementioned games, but unfortunately it’s quite expensive.

Joysticks are still primarily a matter of personal preference. The best
way to choose a joystick is to try the ones on people's stands at computer
shows - there's usually a fair selection. Make sure the one you choose will
jast under heavy stress! I'm going to make sure it gets a good pounding in
all my games!

5S: High Scores

Grisriunmer..................620,600 ledel 20 Iain Fenton
AWK recess eertes level 18 Baul Budley
Hell Sale... ssesesereereee VO, 163 ledel 18 Paul Budley
SMietagalactic Wlamas 170,000 Iebel 17 4. Lidssiment

Repo ge....eersseerseeese-3, 600,000 a. Jones
Sheep itt Hpate........1,375,000 Tom Burton

These scores are those which have changed since last issue. I've heard of a
new ‘Sheep’ score reaching level 27 but I can’t remember the number!
Please send in High Scores; we keep them in a file and it's easier for me to
check them all. Whilst I'm at it, I'll add this to give you all a little
something to aim for:

ANCIP EAL rears, 570,000 89% Fett Mintertt

6: Hairy Happenings

Now that Ancipital is finished, plans are afoot in my skull for the next
C64 offering. I may well have to squeeze in an MSX version of Gridrunner
first, since I've been promising to do some MSX for a long time, and it looks
like I'll be doing my own conversions to the new machine.

Once again I'Jl be experimenting with new designs, gameplay and
control modes. It's too easy for programmers to turn out a ‘chart hit' game
these days: give it simple controls, pretty-pretty graphics, smooth scrolling
and a nice soft tune and you can't fail. The trouble with this approach is
that it doesn't advance the art of games design at all. I like to pick a theme
or contro! mode with which Id like to experiment, and build a game
around it. In Sheep In Space it was speed control by vertical position, and
with Ancipital the key theme is ‘multiple gravity’. You risk being slagged
by the casual reviewer who, if he can’t play a game within 5 minutes,
considers it to be rubbish, but I as a player am getting fed up with the
tired old ‘up=up, down=down, lefteleft, right=right, button=Jump/Fire’
control system. | like a game | have to learn, not just another re-run of the
Manic Miner, Defender, Scramble, Space Invaders ete. crowd with nice
music and soft graphics. | like games that are hard, interesting,
different and/or funny.

1 have the seeds of at least 5 C64 game designs lying around; I'm
tinkering with one at the moment, but I won't decide which one to go for
until I've come back from Peru. You never know, 2 weeks in the Andes
may inspire some freaky new game idea. Whatever it is, it won't be soft,
and that's a promise!

After having completed my first game using the Apple development
system, ] must say I'm very pleased with it. I've just dug out the MSX and
I'm now waiting to get hold of a disk drive so I can write that Gridrunner..,
My Interpod just blew up and so my 4040's are down, it’s back to the old
1541... During the writing of Ancipital |] took delivery of Williams’ amazing

Defender/STARGATE machine.. this has to be the meanest game around,
but it is totally amazing fun to play, and the graphics would blow you
away. The most intensely satisfying feeling in all of video gaming comes
when you arrive at Pod Intersect 00 and press the SMART BOMB button...
the whole game slows right down and there's bits of Pod everywherelll It's
really ace to sit in a darkened room, blasting out some heavy music and
freaking out on the Stargate. Speaking of rock, my ears are still ringing
from ast night when | went to see BI®.. a really good concert, Egyptian
theme, shame there weren't any Mutant Camels!

7: Pods 'n Swarmers...

Various bitz you might find interesting...I‘ve played afew more games
since last issue, and i'll once again recommend the games of others which
I've played and enjoyed. Those of you who wanted Rabbit's Scramble
mentioned in the last issue, don't despair because Rabbit went bust; the
programmer of the Scramble is improving the game (and it was ace
already!) and the improved version will be available on a new label,
Mushroomsoft. Andy Walker of Taskset sent me a copy of their new one,
Poster Paster. It is excellent fun to play, witty and superbly programmed
and probably the best Taskset game to date. Don't miss it... Out of the new
flood of Olympics games, I've seen Activision's Decathlon and Ocean's
Decathlon. I preferred Activision's, because although the Ocean one has
better background graphics and music, the Activision one has much larger,
excellently animated running figures. For those with disk drives Epyz’s
Summer Games has really ace graphics. Parker Bros. Gyruss is expensive,
but plays just like the real thing and has the best soundtrack I've come
across. Beeb owners are lucky to have Frak by Aardvark, and I'd like to
see a C64 version of this amusing game featuring 2 yoyo-toting caveman!
Quicksilva are bringing out Ant Attack for the 64; I've seen the
Spectrum version which was good if a little jerky. Hopefully they'll have
used the smooth scroll and sprites of the C64; if they have it should be well
worth a look for the unusual 3D-effect graphic display.

I'll finish now until next time, the lure of the STARGATE is strong... Do
send in high scores or anything you think we'll find interesting. Maybe I'il
give out some details of my next game then, who knows... I'll be very
interested to hear how people get on with Ancipital.. I think it'll be a while
before anyone manages 100%!

RRR QAQIH AR AERA HRA VR OAV YR
Send high scores or any correspondance to us here at 49 Mount Pleasant, Tadloy, Hants RG26 6BN.
Tho Hairy Ono will be especially interested in your reactions to the Ancipitall Until next time,
may your ears be filled with Pink Floyd and your life with hairy ungulates!

 

the LLAMASOFT newsletter
Third Furry lacus

RAQVQAQAAQLNAQAQAQLN AOA LL QQLOQ

L: What's New Here in Hairy Cj

We are just starting to get responses from people who are getting
to grips with Ancipital Most people are finding it as difficult as I intended,
but there have so far been a couple of master blasters who have done the
lot. Wow, you guys- that's really hot going because I've only ever got 89%
myself and | know what's in all the rooms!!! The thing is, I always
eventually get beat at my own games. Try as I might to make progress so
difficult and obscure that surely only I, the programmer, could possibly got
anywhere, you dedicated zap-fiends come along and cheerfully blast me off
the face of planet Earth. It's good to think that you like the games enough
to become so expert on thom!

We've no actual new games to release this issue (gimme a chance,
I haven't been back from Peru long!) but something new for the ‘64 is well
under way (of which more later). Those of you owning disk drives can now
get disk copies of Hover Bovver, Revenge, Sheep and Ancip for £9.50 each.
I'm sorry they're dearer, but since there arent as many disk as tape
owners we don't make disks in such large quantities as tapes, so the
production costs are higher.

I've also set in train (and I'm not talking British Rail here) events
which should eventually yield “Ancipital’ running on the Spectrum and the

Amstrad. Lest all you "64 and Atari hackers cry out in horror at the very
mention of the black-Frisbee -with -rubber-protrusions-all-over-it, don't
worry. I'm not taking time off from real machines to do it, a mate of mine
is a supremo 280 hacker who was involved in one of the very few good
arcade garnes ever to reach the dead fleshburger, that game being Atarisoft
Robotron. The conversion should take a couple of months and may shed 4
little fight into the benighted lives of those poor souls living under the
shadow of the Rubber Keys of Doom.

Some people have found the Main Bug in Ancipital... you can stand
sideways on certain walls. This is only ratidly amusing at the time and can
be downright dangerous. Try it at your peril! You can get it if you stand on
the bottom and go very close to the left-hand wall. Once you get there
jump up, and if you were close enough you'll be standing upside-down on
nothing. I could always claim that he’s hanging onto the feft-hand wail
with his toenails, but what's the point? Ill offer a prize of @ copy of my
new game (when it's finished!) to the person who sends me the best excuse
for this bug. The entries will be judged on how well they fit in with the
rest of the game, deviousness of the logic by which the excuse is worked
out, and how convincing the excuse is, but mainly on which makes me
laugh the tnost when I read it. I'll print the winning excuse next Beast,
and it will become the Official Excuse for the Bug in Ancipital. The winner
wilt receive a special copy of my new game which will proclaira him/her /it
as the winner of the Grand Excuse Competition during the Novaload.

2: The Liand of the Llama

Quite a few of you have written in to ask (often amongst other
things) what it was like in Peru. The answer to that can only be totally
far out and amazing. Looking back now it’s alla bit unreal. I walked
knackered out of the PCW show and took the tube to Heathrow. 20 odd
hours {ater I stumbled off the plane zapped out of my head by jetlag and
after stashing my bag set off to wander ‘round the streets of Peru's capital,
Lima. Everywhere I looked I could see llama stuff... shops selling Hama
rugs, liama pictures, models of lamas, postcards with Hamas on them,
silver llamas, llama jumpers by the zillion. After a couple of days we left
Lima to tour some of the rest of the country, and at each new place my
mind would be blown all over again. There are some truly incredible
places there... like the Colca Valley, twice as deep as the Grand Canyon and
containing Villages which haven't been visited for 400 years... or Puno on
the shores of Lake Titicaca, at 12000 feet the highest navigable lake in the
world, upon which a whole village floats on a man-made reed raft. (Also in
Puno, and the last thing 1 expected: walking down the street I heard the
sounds of zapping coming from a darkened doorway, and upon entering I
found a rcomful of Peruvian kids blasting away in an arcade. The
machines were about a year old and the kids very competent, they found it

very amusing to beat the pants off the ‘gringo’l)

The Inca ruins were impressive, too... huge blocks of stone
weighing hundreds of tons placed together without cement so that even
today you can’t puta knife between them, and with edges so sharp and
clean that you'd think they'd been cut out with a laser rather than by a
people who didn't even posess the wheel.

The climax to the tour, and the final assault on my already totally
freaked-out mind, was a visit to the lost Inca city of Machu Picchu. This
stands perched on a mountain peak with dizzying drops all around. It is
reached from the railway station by a road which zig-zags up the mountain
for six miles. The whole place has an aura of power about it. I got up early
one morning and hiked up Huayna Picchu, a mountain spire which rises a
good 1000 feet above the ruins. You emerge finally, up a ladder, onto a
small circle of rocks at the summit. There you just sit for an hour and
quietly sreat, Near vertical drops ail around, and a view down through
the clouds that was, truely, awesome. Wow. I didn't ever want to come
down, I was high in all senses of the word!

And of course, everywhere you went, there were llamas. Herds of
them seen from the train, Peruvian women leading them through the
streets, or just wandering through the ruins. They were often accompanied
by alpacas, which are like sheep built on a llama framework, woollier and
not having quite such long legs or necks as the flama, and not quite such a
funny little tail. They were almost without exception good-natured beasts,
quite contrary to popular belief, and allowed you to get to grips with them
in no uncertain terms! I even picked up a baby alpaca at one time. The
exception was an old alpaca outside our hotel at Puno who was
distinguished by his ability to spit with great accuracy from any angle. The
local people were amused when | became the first tourist they'd ever seen
to actually spit back at an alpaca!

The people were aiso good-natured and friendly, and I'm
determined to learn a bit more Spanish before I go back next year! Ail I
Knew were phrases like ‘another Inca Kola please’, ‘more ilamas’, and ‘I
haven't got a guitar’.

The whole trip was totally ace, anyway, and all thanxx to you
game freaks who buy my games! Ta! At least you know I'm doing
something worthwhile with the loot rather than coming the breadhead bit
and buying a Rolls or a Porche. Believe me, I'd rather do a trip like that
than have a fleet of Rolises!

3: Beasties?

I have had letters from many of you beast freaks who have had
difficulty getting copies of the latest games. With both Sheep and Ancipital
people were unable to get the game weeks after release; some weren't
even aware that they'd been launched yet!

The reason for this is, I'm afraid, the commercialisation of the

games market. A year or two ago, if you wrote a good game, the shops
(generally run by computer nuts themselves) saw that it was good and
ordered accordingly. Good software prospered; bad software bombed.

Then people like Boots and Smiths started to become interested,
and large distributors sprang into existence. This was fine for a while; the
distributors bought the good stuff and supplied the chainstores, making it
easier for you to get the games.

Unfortunately, this is where the trouble started. Large companies
saw that they could sell lots of stuff if they could get it into the chain
stores. They started to churn out games like there was no tomorrow,
giving not a thought to originality or quality, only to market share. The
distributors now no longer bought games on the basis of quality. They
bought the games with the most hype behind them. Charts (compiled in
the early days by computer enthusiasts in computer shops) now showed
not which games were best (difficult to say anyway, since games are very
much a matter of taste) but who had the best marketing behind them.

That's basically the way it is today. Too many people are trying to
make too much money out of the industry. Companies talk of ‘megagames”
and advertise products far before they're ready, and often originality is
sacrificed just so that a more ‘marketable’ product (like as not another
flippin’ ladders and ramps job) can be released. Chart hyping occurs;
sometimes distributors (who compile the charts) actually own software
houses (who then feature highly in those charts). The whole scene has
become really heavy and commercial All those breadheads.trying to make
a million pounds and never mind the games. It's disgusting.

The upshot of all this is that you'll often find it difficult to get hold
of, say, Ancipital or perhaps the latest Taskset job simply because the
distributors have bought ‘Oh-God-Manic-Willy-Part-23 11° because
‘Megagame Software Inc’ are backing it with 12 zillion full-colour adverts
in the computer press.

You should fight back. You lot buying my games aren't interested
in hype. You know a good game by now and will still be playing when the
hype bubble bursts and the industry returns to some sort of equilibrium.
In the meantime, don’t take it lying down. If you cant get hold of one
of my games, or have had difficulty in the past, you can write to the buyers
of the two main distributors and complain bitterly that you don't want to
be the victim of their hype game and that it was their fault you couldn't
get hold of Ancipital/Sheep/whatever. If enough of you hassle these guys
maybe they'll take some notice. Remember, when the boom is over and
the breadheads have moved on to something more lucrative, you'll be the
ones stiff buying games from the software distributors and keeping them in
business.

The people to complain to are Clive Digby-Jones, Websters
Software Ltd., Curzon House, Midieton Estate, Guildford, Surrey
and Neil Johnson, Microdealer UK., 29 Burrowfield, Welwyn
Garden City, Herts.

4: Any Net Hackers Out There?

I must admit to having become something of a Compunet junkie. I
like the idea of electronic communication with a lot of C64 loonies via the
Net, often as not at about lam. in the morning because you don’t want to
run a massive phone bill.

At the moment there aren't that many users on there but those
who are seem quite keen. You can send mail and leave messages or even
programs there for people to try. You can buy games if you want to, and
there'll soon be stuff up there like MUD, the Multi-User Dungeon, which
should be fun! I've already put up a free game for people to take, it’s nice
to be able fo try out weird ideas without worrying if they'll sell! I'd also
like to set up a Hairy Game Helpline screen where anyone having problems
with one of my games could leave messages like "how the hell do I get past
Escape-CND in Ancipitat", and "what's the cheat mode in Revenge” to which
I (or indeed anyone else who wanted to) could offer advice. This
newsletter will shortly be uploaded onto Compunet tool If any of you are
already on the Net, why not mail me and let me know you're out there?
My user 1.D. is LLAMA (well what else did you expect???).

5: What's Going On ‘Ere Then??

The good news for C64 zappers who like my games is that I have
decided on my next project. It wasn't any of the ideas | mentioned last
issue, but it was in fact an idea I got whilst listening to Pink Floyd on a bus
in Peru. I'm well up with the coding with most of the core module written,
and I spent today putting in the tune data. The Baughurst Piano Wizard
has surpassed himself this time- the music sounds really nice. The game
itself once again revolves around an unusual and untried idea. The
controls are a little more conventional than Ancipital, but there’s something
else I'm trying out this Ume, The emphasis is on making the game a real
pleasure to play, and making it challenging enough for the most. expert
zappers. Guaranteed no ladders and ramps!!! And just in case any of
you were wondering, yes, the main character is extremely hairy!

My Tempest machine has blown up!! When turned on all I get isa
lot of loud and nasty humming! This is deeply upsetting and I'll have to
get an engineer in. I've now scored over 6 million on Star Wars and I've
increased the difficulty to maximum and made the machine stingier on
dishing out extra shields, to maintain the challenge. Star Gate is as difficult
as ever, though! My top score is only 111,000 and perhaps I shoutd
practise more.

Some excellent new CD's have come out, The Wall and Meddie by
Pink Floyd, Duke and Three Sides Live from Genesis, Led Zep 4 and much
more good stuff besides. Afi this hi-fi heaven can only-inspire me to
greater heights of game design (or maybe depths of depravity is a more
apt description)...

I've also had in some truly amazing ATARI games. You know
when you see 3D mountains in a flight simulator they're usually
wire-frame things that you can see through? None too convincing, right?
Weill there's this Atari game called Behind Jaggi Lines which generates solid
3D mountains which actually look like mountains. It uses a branch of
maths called fractals, and believe me it’s good, This maths hurts when you
fly into it. The game itself involves rescuing pilots down in this
mountainous terrain and blasting hostile laser turrets. Nothing beats the
simple pleasure of flying ‘round the mountains at a scale speed of Mach 3.5
blasting up the faser turrets... I hope this comes over to the C64 soon!

Deep Purple have released an album! I can't believe it! It’s really
pretty good too, if you like that kind of music (which I do!). Something else
to sustain me through the long hours of hacking ahead...

6: High Scores Update

Hell Sate......947,243 level 20 Chat-MacHlastaiv
Revenge......7,945,200 Chad Mac Alastair
Mlatrix.........294,400 ledel 19 Presisent Apocalypse
Sheep in Space ...2,450,000 |. 41 Tom Burton
WAL.C........235,521 Robert Grace
Gncipital hi score 14,201,400 99% Chad Maca.
Ancipital hi % 6,081,545 100% 6.Benn

I'll try to keep these updated every issue. Wow!l! Some people
really know how to score on Ancipital, and I'm in awe of some of the
percentages returned, Some of these people had better give ME lessons!
It's a hard life when the only time I can be best at my own games is before
I release them!

Keep on blasting those games anyway and achieving new high
scores. I'd be interested to hear any opinions on the games- do you prefer
a straight blast like Hell Gate, or a freaky one like Revenge, or something
you've got to think about a bit like Ancipital?

7: Some Good Reviews...

During the past few months we've come across some things that
I'm sure you'll find amusing. Reviews are at the best of times mostly a
reflection of the reviewers’ own taste in games. A good reviewer can,
however, make valid criticism of a gatne and no designer minds reading
fair and constructive criticism.

Unfortunately, many reviewers these days are given a stack of
tapes and told to review them in, say, an afternoon. Thus they spend about
5 minutes on each game (if that), probably don't get to read the
instructions and get no real idea of what's going on. This results in some
pretty bizarre things being said about the game, and at worst can lead to
an unfavourable review which is totally unjustified.

To prove my point, here are a few examples that I've seen
recently...

1) Home Computer Weekly had the kindness to assure prospective
Sheep in Space buyers that extra fuel could be obtained by colliding
with the aliens in Free Space. Well that's news to me, I thought you
had to land and eat grass! But no, the ground has other uses apparentiy,
because the same reviewer then goes on to state that flying through the
air is a faster way to get around the planet than walking on the
ground... Actuaily this is true; flying is in fact 100% faster than walking
on the ground, because walking on the ground has the following
drawbacks: zero velocity, stasis, progression rate of zero pixels per second,
infinite transit time from point A to point B, definite static tendencies,
unwillingness of sheep's little legs to move, tendency to eat if landed on
grass, tendency to explode if landed on anything else...

2) TY Gamer assured anyone interested in Atari AMC. that the
background shading effects were just colours and that the graphics
weren't even a fraction of what could be achieved on even the 16k
ATARI... OX, if these guys were really on the ball maybe you could
believe them but then maybe Page 6, a specialist Atari magazine who
make it their business to look at all Atari releases for both 16k and other
machines, are more qualified to pass such sweeping judgements, and in
their own review of AMC. they reached precisely the opposite
conclusion...

3) Your Computer started off an Ancipital review extremely well by
boldly stating that the game has 81 rooms. It states about four times in
the Ancipital instructions that the game has 100 rooms, and makes
references to the 10x10 layout. The same reviewer then proceeds to opine
that there's nothing really original in the game. | think I can tell you
exactly what happened... a) Reviewer opens Ancipital box. Loads game,
feels instructions are too much to read. Has quick giance at map sheet.
Notes room numbering 0-9 on each axis and makes elementary mistake of

assuming that the range 0-9 is 9 units, not 10. Therefore multiplies 9X9
and arrives at §1 for the number of rooms. b) Game finishes loading and
the reviewer presses FIRE to start. He starts zapping and thinks ‘another
shoot'em'up', Maybe he gets lucky and inverts onto the roof, but doesn’t
get to stand on the wall because not having read the instructions he doesn’t
know how to jump-turn. After a while he gets the bottom door open and
falls through to the next room. Messes around for a bit, maybe goes down
to the Rory room, then gives up. Probably watches the attract mode a
couple of times then writes his review, Concludes there's not much original
because (a) he always walks on the roof where he comes from; (b) he never
managed to walk on the walls because he couldn't Jump-turn; (c) he never
got to any of the puzzle screens and assumes it’s all zapping; (d} he never
saw the Help screens because he didn't read the instructions; (e) he’s
probably into a different style of games anyway.

My point is that reviewers should do the job properly or not at all.
By ‘property” I mean actually taking the time to learn a game thoroughly,
spending several hours at the very least on each game. The whole idea of
saying that any game is ‘better’ than any other is pretty stupid beyond a
certain point, anyway, Once a certain technical standard is assured and the
gaine is bug- and glitch-free, anything else is purely persona! opinion. It’s
like asking a Gary Numan fan to review Led Zep’s Stairway to Heaven. So
the whole bit about ‘Jet Set Willy is better than Super Pipeline’ say, is
meaningless. Both games are well programmed, and JS is better than SP
but only to a platform game player- anyone into Taskset stuff would
reach the opposite conclusion, So my plea to reviewers is to take time to
learn the games, and don't attempt to review stuff which is too far out of
line with your own likes. My advice to the rest of you is: Don’t believe
any review which says ‘game KX is better than game Y’ unless game Y is
obviously incompetently written Don't ever believe advertising. Insist
on seeing a demo before you buy if you're at all unsure that you'll like a
game.

Quickly, my picks for this month: Space Taxi, Muse, disk, C64:
amusing Lunar Lander variant.., Elite, Acronsfot, Beeb: a thinking man’s
Star Raiders... Boulder Dash, C64/Atari, First Star, very simple idea
well-executed and quite addictive... Bruce Lee, Atari/64, can't remember
who by, nice kung fu game and I like the mooing cow screen... Rocket
Roger, C64, unholy union of jetpac and Son of Biagger, but unlike the latter
the gameplay in this is far from soft, coded by the author of Guardian...
Toy Bizarre, Activision, strange and original jurnping game.. More next
time and full report on my new game... keep on zapping!

 

aaaneWQQ?®? oaeaa Wri n aaah ta a a Ge
Any feedback you heve on anything to do with the newsletter or the gamee you can
send to as here et 49 Mount Pleasant. Tedicy, Hants RG26 6BM. Yak the Heiry
likes to receive communication from like-minded entities! More lanacy soon.,
and wherever you ere, whatever you do, think of camels... {or goots,
sheep tlemes,yeke, whatever...)

Oc)

a eee

 

the LLAMASOFT newsletter
Fourth Fleecy Issue

QAQQLN AQAA AVL AQAQQQAQANLQ

Plenty! Many things have happened since my return from the
Many=Llama‘d Land. The occurrences I have to relate will hopefully please
you as much as they have me... My next game should be out-in February,
probably towards the énd ‘cos tape duplication takes a bit of time. So far
most of the ‘code is complete and there's only a couple of weeks’ work left
to do on it. You'd get it earlier except for the fact that I have arranged to
satisfy a strange and unnatural urge I have to slide down mountains at high
speeds with strange long things on my feet, whilst listening to my Walkman
blasting out some good stuff. I'll be spending two weeks in Italy doing just
that, granted sufficient snow (and with recent weather conditions that
should be assured, Italy's just had its heaviest snowfall for 20 years, yak °
yak yak). On my return to the UK a good week's solid codestorming should
see the game finished. Then I| can get down to writing Psychedelia on the
Atari (sensory overload timelll). Until then I'm looking forward to hacking
down the slopes at Mach 8 and listening to something psyche-wrenchingly
good at apocalyptic levels of volume on the Walkman... there's a
well-stocked arcade near the hotel too, if I fancy an apres-ski biast!

 

7 unlock your soul

CREATE

PSYCHEDELIA. This is what all the delay's been for. I Was quite
peacefully doing the new game when this idea which had been kicking
around my skull awhile started beating loudly on the braincells. I'd long
imagined some kind of light synthesiser I'd like to see at a gig or a party,
something with which you could visualise the very feel of a good piece of
music. I didn't imagine | could ever put such a concept successfully onto a
home micro, but one Sunday I got back from running and decided to have a
litule tinker on my ‘64. An algorithm was in my head, it came from God
knows where, it was just there, complete. Maybe my subconscious made it.
Maybe my brain was leaking 3 months into the future. I coded it up,
assembled, SYSed in, picked up the joystick and blew my brains out.

| played with it. Then | put on some Dave Gilmour and turned off
the light and played and PLAYED with it. In a state of near-total freakout, |
‘phoned a mate to come over, | wanted to see if it was just me... It wasn't.
HE played with it arid we had the Dave Gilmour again... We needed a third
opinion. We met another mate, went to the pub, came back, loaded up and
turned up the CD. We finally summoned the willpower to shutdown at
about half-four in the morning...

I dropped the game | was working on and spent the next two
weeks coding like a demon. | have never worked so hard at anything in my
life, nor have I ever wanted anything so much as I wanted to complete the
light synth. | finished versions on the C64, Vic and C16.

I won't try and describe Psychedelia - | can't relate it to anything -
except to say it is a light synthesiser. You do it, preferably, to music. You
control colourflows and lightforms, and like a synthesiser you can change all
the pattern generation parameters, store them away on presets, program a
sequencer, edit lightforms, record input for later playback, save your
favourite settings to tape (on the C64 version) and have a solid total
freakout.

We've found that there are a few people who can't get behind
Psychedelia, but they're not many. The easiest rule of thumb is how a given
person responds to music. If you just have music as a background noise

while you're doing something, maybe you won't get into PSYCH. If,
however, you're the sort of person who plays music just to listen to and
freak out to, then you'll love PSYCH. If you really get into your music, so
heavy you can feel it, then PSYCH is right in your brainsync. Just try it.
There's no score, no bullets, no levels, no objective. You can't do badly but
you can get very, very good. Since I wrote it I need at least one session a
day, preferably late night with all the lights off, the CD laying something
earthshattering on me, display on the big-screen TV. Just stand there and
get in sync with the music, lose myself in colourspace.

PSYCHEDELIA is for me the fulfillment of a personal dream, and in
my opinion the best thing I've ever written. What you see on your ‘64 just
might be the first small step into a new fusion of colour/sonics... The best is
yet to come, and maybe I'll be one of the first to get there...

 

DESTRO Brit"!

Mama Liama is the new game of which | have been writing, which was
initially dreamed up whilst | was listening to Pink Floyd on a bus in Peru
and observing the local beasties. It was originally going to be just a nice
scrolling shoot'em‘up with the only novel feature being that you controlled
three beasts at once throughout the action. However, as Rory say, All
Things Mutate and so did this game.

It ali started to change a bit when I'd got the coremodules written.
You all know by now just how much | dig grav FX and inertials. | designed
the CM so that just everything was inertial- you've got a real job to force
an object to go in a straight line, and even then it has inertia- and it looked
like it was working just fine. The aliens flowed beautifully, describing such
nice curves that you might even think I knew more maths than how to
count up to F, Unfortunately I had problems. Bullets, you see, go in straight
lines. The aliens did not. Unlike most games, where the alien paths are
satisfyingly straight and predictable and easy to intersect with your
straight-line bullets, the aliens in ML go in crazy loops. Normal bullets just
didn't play well in the game- so scrub bullets and implement the inertial
killdroid (a new killsystem, an inertial one for an inertial game!!). With the
new system installed | was happier... but | wanted to change the game more
so I turned to the wave structure.

So far, multi-wave games seem to be done in sequential order of
waves (like Revenge, start at level | and try to get to level 42) or in
map-style like Ancipital. | didn't want sequential waves, too boring, and I'd
just used the map structure in Ancip and didn't want to fall into the
Ultimate trap of getting into an arcade-adventure monomania. Random
waves didn't appeal, you'd not got enough control... so eventually I decided
to do a completely amorphous wave structure. There's no first wave, no last
wave and no ‘correct’ order. The wave select mode is quite nice, a bit like a
2D Rubik cube really, and there'll be a few nice strategic elements to the
gameplay (like the antiGenesis and retroGenesis devices) to add to the
interest. I can tell you now that there are 100 possible waves played out
over five different planets, four different gravities (although not all at once
like Ancip!) and that you're going to be seeing quite a lot of the new rising
megastar of the Yak’s experimental gamesystems... Rory the Savage
Guinea Pig is back and he’s more savage than EVER!! You'll find the crazed

WT a ae

 

Peruvian rodent turning up in all manner of places in ML, just wait&see..

The game's not quite finished yet (as I write this I've done 90 waves
and I'm going to put in the last 10 tomorrow, then the day after that |
hyperspace for Italy in the morning and !'ll do the last bits of coding
immediately I get back) but everything's on the beam, and you should see
results in February.

First of all, thanxx to everyone who sent stuff in for me to read, I had
a good giggle at some of the entries. There was one, however, which stood
out clear ahead of the rest- | was most impressed, the style was just pure
Douglas Adams (and J'm sure that you've all realised that the Guide has long
been a Guide to me, if you see what | mean) and quite ingenious. Although
the full story is too long for me to put in here (I’m not a megatypist) the
key points are as follows:

"Using fiendishly clever and sophisticated Theta-ray Synapse Image
Intensifiers, the Zzyaxians produced the Ancipital version of black
suspenders and stockings, a famous phagor wanton known as Shnn Dhrr
Lyrr.... This image was then projected onto the wall of the chamber in
which the hapless phagor battled with the black Zzyaxian forces
Fortunately, most of the ancipitals were made of sterner stuff, and
managed to ignore this sexual spectacle, but some... succumbed to
temptation and flung themselves into the necessary position to partake,
held there by sheer will-power and the Magnetto-boots thoughtfully
provided by their Terran allies. The disappointment on discovering that the
lascivious lady was a mere holographic image was too much for the
courageous phagor, his grip slackened and his end was swift.”

There, you see- not a bug at all but yet another fiendish Zzyaxian
psychodisorientation scheme! The sender of this ingenious and amusing
plan (well totally crazy really, that’s why I liked it) was one Marion
Warden, but unfortunately I didn't get an address so if you're out there-
send in the address (NOT in Hex, please) so I can send off a copy of ML once
it’s finished.

4: WhaNexxt?

Now that I'm getting to the end of Mama Llama you'll doubtless want
to know what I'll be doing next. Imminent after ML is the implementation
of a PSY system on the Atari. This will be very much a second-generation
system with many additional features over the '64 version, due mainly to
the display-list nature of the Atari screen and all the possibilities that
implies, and taking advantage of the huge colour pallette available to that

machine. I'll really enjoy doing that, and all the while my brain is
considering new ideas and concepts for games so that I can hit the '64 as
soon as I've stopped Atari-ing. Look out for Rory, ‘cos | like the character so
much I'll probably be using him in his own game sometime soon. I'm going
to make him the hero next time round, because so far he’s always been the
villain!

We also have PSY running on the Spectrum {it works quite well, too,
good and fast) so we can literally light up the lives of Clive's teeming
hordes. The chap who converted PSY to the squishboard is also converting
to MSX and Amstrad formats, and with my own Atari conversion too, we'll
be able to PSYCH out a lot of people. Atari have promised me one of their
new 16-bitters Real Soon Now, and with the extra speed and the 512-colour
pallette this should be set to blow out a few brains once I get it running the
lightsynth. On both old and new Ataris I'll be using an extended
colourspace, so look out for quite a few extra features.

4: High Score Update

{1 was just thinking: why can't the Mac have presets like Psychedelia?
It's a pain to have to select Bold, Underline, 18-point every time I get toa
heading, then change back after... how about it, Apple???)

I'm not going to put down all the scores this time, I'll just print
updates to any which have been beaten and print a full list every third or
fourth Beast. Anyway, here goes:

Metagalactic ete..........282,177 1. 27 Haul Metsstein
ADIUCLOL.....crssesreereereee 47,500 ‘Barfield’ MeBonald
Frell Gate .....-ceccereee 1,210,793 Chad MacAlastair
BeEVenge...ccesseccserereeee 40,011,247 Chad Mac Alastair
PRALCIK.crrscesscessresrsereee 323,000 President Apocalypse
‘Cippy hi score 21,801,357 99% Chad MacAlastair
‘Cippy highest 100% 6,500,000 Dom Burton

This Chad MacAlastair must be doing some really heavy blasting, and
Tom Burton is extending his SHEEPish talents to the realms of ‘Cippy's
battle... at least I can be sure that no-one's going to send in any high-scores
for PSYCHEDELIA! (Are they???) I've had some brilliant scores on Mama
Llama but that might have something to do with the fact that (a) I designed
all the waves in it, (b) 1 hacked the score routine, (c) you can't die yet
anyway, and (d) Rory's being kind to me ‘cos | didn't eat any guinea pigs in

Peru.

Some people have written in asking for the complete background of
the Terran battle against the Zzyaxians, so I'll give you a brief history of the
battle and the circumstances leading to it.

First indications of something amiss came when the Earth government
funded the construction in space of huge orbiting solar-power stations.
These were placed in a geosynchronous orbit and the power was beamed
down to Earth receivers in the form of microwaves. The receivers fed the
power thus obtained into the Terran grid for use by us, Malfunctions in the
Grids (as the lattice-shaped collectors were known) turned out upon
investigation to be caused by hostile droids of extraterrestrial origin. The
crack Gridrunner squadrons were formed to rid the Grids of this menace,
and they succeeded, or so it seemed. The ten years after the Grid Wars
were peaceful except for a single incidence of hostile droneships attempting
to abduct scientists from a Terran research base, but luckily that base
housed the then-experimental ProtoNeutrino SuperHyperConductive Blamm
Blamm K'pow Photon Cannon which was used to good effect in warding off
the attackers. There were also a number of unexplained UFO sightings over
Egypt which no-one really seemed too worried about...

The peace was shattered in the next ten years: the Droids returned to
the Grids and displayed their first use of psychodisorientation, a
characteristic Zzyaxian tactic, by deploying strange cameloid creatures
against the Matrix squadrons which were sent into battle. Terran analysts
failed to make the connection between the dromedary nature of these
strange assailants and the UFO sightings over Egypt, and so were caught
totally and terribly by surprise when the now-legendary Attack of the
Mutant Camels was unleashed to ravage the planet... The huge
neutronium-shielded beasts wreaked havoc upon the Earth until they were
finally halted by the valiant efforts of the Terran pilots sent against them in
their tiny but lethally-equipped fighter craft.

Following that battle, we learned, through our first tentative
interstellar contacts, the evil nature of the entities who were our foe. The
combined might of the empires of Zzyax and Irata enslaved the sentient
races of half the Galaxy Earth, in pushing out towards the stars, had
brought itself to the attention of the Evil Overlords who responded in the
manner to which they were accustomed... with blasters blazing. We'd
managed to resist them so far, though, and they weren't too pleased......

Meanwhile, Terran science was being advanced in the urgency of war.
Soon we had developed our own enhanced MetaBeasts, genetically-modified
animals capable of rational thought, meaningful relationships, the ability to
appreciate Pink Floyd and Genesis, score over 100,000,000 on Star Gate and
as often as not, spit laser bolts. Armed thus, and riding in ships equipped
with our recently-perfected Interstellar Overdrive (the basic mathematics

of which were derived from a harmonic analysis of an early Pink Floyd
track) we set out to free the Galaxy of the blight which enslaved half its
people.

Where the Zzyaxians popped out of hypertunnels near the Earth, we
constructed Laser Zones and later Hell Gates to blast them as they
materialised. Our telepathic MetaGoats contacted the abducted Terran
camels being held on a Zzyaxian research world, and having convinced the
camels of their loyalty to Terra, initiated a rebellion by the dromedaries
which caught the Zzyaxians completely unawares and destroyed their
complete research post on that planet. The battle at Sothis B led to the
development of the Battle Sheepoid and the liberation of a number of
Ancipital creatures, later to become our allies. Our farthest outposts were
defended by Metabeasts descended from Andean camelids... and so we
defended Terra (so that humans like Gordon Bennet could mow their lawns
in peace) and even now, the Terran Confederation aided by the resistance
movements upon countless worlds gathers its strength for an onslaught
upon the black world of Zzyax Prime...

Who knows when that final assavit may come, or what form it will
take? Will the Mutant Camels finally be reunited with the Humans, man
and beast joined in battle against the foe? Will the Metagalactic Llamas
turn their lasers on the Zzyaxian slime-creepers?

Watch this hyperspace........

: Bi PC’

Well, me Tempest’s still down!!! I'm gonna suffer withdrawal soon but
I haven't lost my touch, as a quick blast in the Las Vegas in London
confirmed. Must get it done, though, when I get back from Italia. While I
was in London that day | went to an amusement-trade exhibition in
Olympia, it was pretty good... played the conversion of the Star Wars game,
it's called The Empire Strikes Back and there are four phases... Probots on
the Ice Planet Hoth, which you blast before they can shoot their messages
off to ol' Darth; Imperial Walkers, which are fun to bring down with ropes,
and which were the original influence for my Mutant Camels (although |
quite fancied the Taun-Tauns in that film too); then more TIE fighters just
like in Star Wars; then an asteroid shower to negotiate. Not bad, but the hit
of the show had to be Marble Madness, a game for Atari's new System One
convertible arcade system. You control a marble rolling around some lovely
3-d tracks past various nasties. Pretty graphics, 8-channel sound (!) and
above all original and well designed. If that's a typical System One game
then the Llama Liab might just be able to accommodate one more arcade
machine Real Soon Now.....

I've got problems in the Liab, too, from a new addition to my already
large collection of furry creatures... Following the untimely and much
lamented passing of the PC (Privileged Cat, the one who used to warm his
arse on my disk drives) we have acquired a Siamese kitten with the given

name of Stormtrooper but who | refer to as Gremlin, on account of his
disproportionately large ears and mischievous habits much like the
creatures in Spieiberg’s film. He's already eaten off the Reset button which
used to dangie from my Apple interface, and tends to stroll around on
keyboards and behind my hi-fi. He's got a howl like a banshee too which he
uses to good effect. People on the ‘phone have been convinced that the _
unearthly howling was either human (they thought it was a baby) or else of
completely extra-terrestrial origin...

I got lotsa good new stuff here too, an amazing huge-screen TV I got
to Psychedeleise on {in the dark! with loud music! WHAT a trip!!!) and
these incredible stools which look EXACTLY like sheep and are really
comfortable to sit on. I've also partaken of the new Sony CD player Which is
so smail I refuse to beleive that it really exists... look out for me in the
Summer on me funny bike, cruising around listening to Floyd on me
portable CD... My Star Gate score is up now, to 148-odd thousand, and I've
got to the great bit in the Firebomber Showdown where you can nail SIX
pods at once with a single Smart Bomb...

Thanxx to all of you who sent me Christmas cards, much appreciated
and brightened up the Llab no end. | also enjoy reading all the letters you
send in, sorry if I can't reply in person to every one but I'm sure you'd
prefer that I wrote more games rather than letters... but do let me know
what you think of the stuff, especially PSYCHEDELIA, I want to see if it
turns you on like it does me!

Following the crash of PCG magazine, a number of new ones are
slarting up, and it looks like I'll have a reguiar column in one or two of
them, so watch out for ‘Rory Say’ in the near future. | quite enjoy writing in
English instead of 6502 now and again! If any of you go Netwise on the
near future drop me a byte or two.

Audio playlist this month: U2 Live under a Blood Red Sky;
Talkingheads (Stop Making Sense) GREAT Psychedelia music; Jean-Michel
Jarre's amazing new one ZOOLOOK; for playing a good blast’em, try Iron
Maiden's Powerslave, or else some Dio (my Stargate high score was set
under Dio); for Psychedelia try Saucerful of Secrets (Floyd), Los Endos,
Dukes Travels/Dukes End, Supper's Ready (Genesis), Green (Steve Hillage
and use preset *2!!)... I'm recording a few Psych freakouts on video tapes,
come along to the shows to see it in action and listen to some good sounds
too!

Video gamewise I've been a little PSYCHed out recently to play many
games on my ‘64, but Impossible Mission is a must if only for the
AAA Aaaaaarrrggghhhbh!! you get when your little man falls down a hole.
The new Task Set one looks quite passable too. Watch out for some really
wicked political characterisations in a forthcoming Taskset release soon...
Anyway, Peace and Good Vibes be with you all, may the Beast be with you
until next time and long may you ride the colourSpace Vorterz.......

Rory say: My earthly incarnation may be terminated but within the GameSystem | live FOREVER.....
The Yak greets all expecially-brainsynced entities beyond the Vortexx... maybe I'll let you all sign
my cast, when | get back from ski-ing with a broken leg... Ride the Colourfiow. Catch the Lightform..

The LLAMASOFT
Newsletter

 

RTCA PET

 

Atari: Rainbow Rising

COLOURSPALE: SILICON RALNBOW ON ATART
YAK GOES TO HANOVER- NEW ATARI AND
COMMODORE MICROS PRODDED AROUND

1: Cotourspace is Curved

If I had got together with a hardware manufacturer to design a video
controller expressly to do Psychedelia on, I'd have probably ended up with
something like the ANTIC chip built into the Atari computers. I've just
finished my third Atari machine code program ever, and the more I do the
more the system astonishes me, The things you can do with that thing are
just terminally weird!!!

The Atari version of Psychedelia is now completed. Believe me, if you
thought the Commodore one was good, this'll blast your brains out. I've
fallen in love with the whole thing all over again, can't stop doing it, it’s
amazing. The idea is the same as Psychedelia, but now you've got all the
Atari colours available, you can curve the screen, reflect it with hardware,
interlace it, even change the resolution as the program is running. Each
colour within the colourflow can be made dynamic, oscillating with a
definable amplitude and frequency, and by offsetting each step of the flow
you get the most amazing bands of metallic fire rippling up and down the
entire lightform. If you really want to burn your brains you can kick in
the stroboscopics, amazing in a dark room, variable-frequency slices of
hi-energy photons to really freak you out. You can even do it
simultaneously with another entity by using the Dual Joystick mode. There

, are 80 presets in the Atari version, and 16 user-definable lightforms.
There is even the ability to draw pictures on the screen and have all the
patterns flow behind them, and you can redraw the picture anywhere on
the screen with a single keypress, in whatever mode of symmetry you
require. The RECORD option has been improved to keep track of all the
Keyboard operations you do as well as the joystick input. There is a tape
LOAD and SAVE option to save parameters or motion, just as on the
Commodore.

All in all, Atari COLOURSPACE (that’s what we call it) is the next step
along the road of the PSYCHEDELIA concept. That such large advances have
been possible without having to go to more powerful and more expensive
computer systems is due to the amazing, zarjaz design of the Atari
hardware. That screen is just amazing. OK, so the player missiles aren't a
lot of cop when compared to Commodore Sprites, but they're better than
none at ali, and once you've come to know the Ways of the Display List and
you realise that if you want a particular screen, ne matter how weird, all
you have to do is tell ANTIC to build it.... well after that any other type of
screen just seems plain Stone-Age. And people are still buying Spectrums
instead of Ataris... oh well, so it goes, I suppose.

We'll be giving demos of both Commodore and Atari lightsynths at the
Commodore show in June, so people can see the next stage of the idea at
work, and can speculate on what Ill do when I get hold of an Amiga (or a
520ST for that matter).

Watch it, thouch... so far I've shown the Atari Colourspace to three
Commodore Psychedelia junkies, and now they re all in search of the cheap

400...

: I Have Seen t :

As it worked out, the completion of Colourspace co-incided with the huge
Hanover Fair, and as it turned out I was invited to demonstrate
Colourspace on the Atari stand, running on the new 130KE (which is an
800XL with an extra 64k available to bank switch, and a really zarjaz
keyboard, very nice)

More to the point, it meant the opportunity (with the co-operation of the
Atari staff) to sit down for a half-hour after the show had closed one day,
and play about with the Atari 520ST. Itis really, amazingly good. I saw it
running Forth and doing mega-fast graphics. I used GEM to open & close
files and felt immediately at home- it’s just like the ol’ Mac here. You can
even pull-down a little window from the top of the screen, containing a
game of Breakout to play if you get bored with whatever you're doing. The
screen is most impressive, the “lo-res” screen is in fact 320x200 odd ina
choice of 16 different colours per pixel out of a palette of 512 (!}. From the
demos I saw it looks like precise video timing is possible, too: there were a
couple of the good old Atari rainbows about (old Atari hands will know
what I mean) and one or two displays of the entire 512-colour range which
must have been done with some kind of raster interrupt.

The machine was also to be seen running off a neat little hard disk (the
prototype I saw was encased in a 1050 box) which provided several
example pictures loading almost instantaneously. We were also to have
been treated to a demo of the CD-ROM system but unfortunately it didn't
turn up. One of the prototype-STs broke down and it was taken apart so
that we couid ail see it’s innards. It’s really neat, no enormous kluges
anywhere, the only thing which seems not yet finalised is the Gem OS. This
will initially be provided on disk until all the bugs are out, then it'll go into
ROM. For this reason the first ST's will all be 520's. (Rather large amounts
of the RAM of a 130ST would be taken up by a non-ROM OS. I know ‘cos I
have the same problem with my 128k Macintosh!).

Atari don’t have any definite pians for games as yet, but they're keen for
independent houses to develop stuff for it, and I for one will be, starting
with 16-bit Colourspace. The price is gonna be around £450 for the base
unit an’ 512 K, and a disk ll cost around £150 and be of the 3.5in Sony
drive type. It seems expensive, but get this: there are plenty of disk based
Beeb owners out there, and a disk-based ST will cost about the same as a
disk-based Beeb... what would you rather have? 32k... or 512k? 6502 or
68000? Acorn DFS... or GEM?

The only negative thing I can possibly think of is that the sound, for such
a megamachine, isn’t intense amounts of cop.. it’s using one of those old
AY-series PSG's such as you find in all the MSX machines and the Vectrex.
OK, it’s not bad, just a 3-sound-plus- 1-noise-channel bog standard cheapie,
but I'd have liked something mega-powerful and preferably stereo,
Rumours abound that later ST's will have the suffix M and will carry
Atari's new and powerful 6-channei synth chip. I hope so.

Commodore were also there with plenty of 128's to play with. The

keyboard is very nice indeed, and the Commodore 64 Compatible mode
seems to be just that totally compatible with all existing C64 software. The
128 seems to be 3 different machines in a single box your good ol 64, the
Commodore 128 itself running Basic 7.0, and a CP/M 60-column business
machine

The 126 mode is quite nice, the extended Basic containing the disk
commands plus all the graphic commands which some of us oldsters first
encountered on the Vic Super Expander. You can get 60 column text too,
and an increased resolution of 640x200 in hi-res. (I'm not sure if this
res-doubling also applies to multicolour mode but itd be nice if it did)
Lots of bytes are available to BASIC too, not as much gets eaten as on the
C64. An exciting possibility 1s the configuring of the top 64k as a Ramdisk,
and indeed some keywords have been included in the BASIC for this, but
when | tried STASH (a Ramdisk reserved word) ail I got was
?UNIMPLEMENTED COMMAND ERROR. Probably needs an extra ROM ir
something

Where the 128 will score is in having lots of C64 software already
around, most of which can be xverted to use the extra RAM. Ail your old
games will run OK. The 128 was also demonstrating the ability to run 2
monitors at once, quite useful for business | suppose but not many
gamesters are rich enough to have 2 monitors. Commodore's new monitor,
1901 or something, looks pretty zarjaz too, but also looks expensive,

I'm still not sure how much Commodore are gonna sell the 128 for. It
can't be too close to the ST (unless Commodore hope that the initial lack of
software for ST, and all the C64 progs for 126, will carry it). They're gonna
have to go for the business market, ‘cos all the games on the 126 are sure
as anything going to be xverted C64 stuff. Gamesters really wanting an
8-bit 2x64k machine would be better off with the 130XE methinks; they'd
not be paying for a CPM option they‘d probably not use. The 126 will be
quite nice for people developing ‘64 progs, but I figure if your average
weirdo on the street is gonna pay over a couple of hundred for a machine
he's gonna want something special, Cheap, the 128 would be great. Much
over £300 and I dunno, for that much bread something has gotta be hot...

Another amazing thing I saw at Hanover, all those German pirates at
work! You know how German pirates circulate cracked progs on disk from
all over the world, well there they were, all lined up on the Commodore
stand with boxes & boxes of disks, copy programs running, directories
being compared, swaps made. I saw several of my own progs change hand,
plus just about anything you can think of, English or American. The latest
seemed to be some Stateside thing called G.I Joe which just about every
Commodore owner who had a disk on them had copied before leaving the
show. I talked to some of the pirates, they see nothing wrong in what they
do. Itis done without malice, ‘cracking’ is just a hobby, they usually don't
even play the games anyway. Even one of the Commodore employees
swapped stuff enthusiastically with the pirates, turning down the monitor
so that other Commodore staff couldn't see the Di/Sector menu running
‘Copying Forbidden’ said all the notices around the stand, but no-one took

any notice at all..The Amiga, by the way, was nowhere to be seen, nor was
it mentioned in any literature...

The Fair was very interesting to see: everything was there from
computers to locomotives, visitors ranged from businessmen to punks and
hippies. It was also really big (I think someone said’ you could fit 32 Earls
Courts into the exhibition grounds). My conclusions? I think that
Commodore supremacy may be short-lived: in the new dawn of affordable
16-bit power and large amounts of memory, | see a rainbow rising, an
Atari rainbow. Uncle Clive is wrong about the ST: it exists, it works, it is
very nearly finished and it’s going to blast the QL into a rather large crater
in the ground. Gameswise, I think the C64 and Atari 8-bits are the best,
and for those who can afford the luxury, the Atari ST gives you 512k, a
68000, a Mac-type 0S, 512 colours and (once I've got my ST) a really zarjaz
version of Colourspace. Mark my words: Atari are back from the dead in a
big way...

Playin’ Games

I been doing a lot of this recently (but don't I always??). There's quite a
nice new shoot-‘em'up coming out from Activision soon, good for those who
like a good difficult zap. I hear rumours about a mega-amazing version of
Crystal Castles on the ‘64... I've long been a fan of the unusual surreal 3-D
Pacman-type game in the arcades, so a good xversion will be gratefully
received. Marble Madness is in the arcades now. It is really excelient- it
was designed by Mark Cerny, who was mentioned in The Winners Guide to
Video Games’ as being the first human to score over a million on Defender
and who's now putting his games experience to good use in Atari’s design
department. If all his games are as good as MM’ then we can expect great
things in future... I must put in a plug here for ‘3D Star Strike’ at the
moment only available for Speccy & Amstroid, but hopefully soon on the
6502. It’s a version of Star Wars, and it works brilliantly. I wouldn't have
thought it possible to reproduce the Great Game on any micro never mind
the benighted rubberchips, but it’s all there, towers, trench and ail.
(Apparently the Amstrad one has stereo blasting, too). The guys who
wrote it are a really together bunch of guys, too. The Speccy version is
actually worth digging out your Spectrum for.

I love the 3-D sequence in the new Activision game (1 think it's called
Genie of the Lamps or something). The bit where you're flying down the
tunnel of light is excellently done and reminiscent of the bit in Tac-Scan
where your fleet goes down the warp tunnel. (Do you remember Tac-Scan?
That was a real blast-and-a-haif that one, old SEGA colour vector-scan
game with some really heavy sonixx),

I've seen the new Ultimate ‘64 stuff, and it’s technically excellent (apart
from the odd raster-interrupt mistiming in Karnath which causes the status
panel to glitch) and of course the reviewers drool, but... | dunno, somehow
there is something of humanity lacking in Ultimate's stuff. They're almost
too good, like someone told an android ‘Here are the parameters for a chart

hit gate; produce several’. They tend to follow established and successful
formats and are without exception brilliantly programmed, but I don't
get any personality coming across in the game, no-one behind the creation
to empathise with. You never meet their programmers, they're
unapproachable, when they go to the awards ceremonies they only send
down the girl who answers the ‘phone. Programming a game isn't just an
exercise in satisfying mass-market demands; for me, it’s an act of creation
containing elements of my own personality, and aimed at people who go
for an unusual style. True you can sell more games if you conform but
then you're not really expressing yourself.

Oh yeah, Mama's really been stirring it up amongst the reviewers. Mama
is well wacky and quite difficult to learn, introduces several new gameplay
elements and is {I think) my best game (as opposed to PSYCH the
noni-game) yet. Mama is something you have to approach with an open
mind and the willingness to take time learning. Anything so freaked out
and unusual was bound to produce a mixed bag of reviews: we've had
everything from raves down to rude dismissals. There were varying
reasons: many reviewers can't devote the kind of time necessary to
learning such a game, some were already well into the Liamastyle of game
and loved it, others seemed to loathe me, my games and anything remotely
to do with llamas. My prize for “Wally Review of the Month’ must surely go
to Commodore User. Their reviewer mentioned virtually nothing of the
game's actual mechanics, and the entire basis for his criticism seemed to be
that he didn't agree with my tastes in music...(write what you like chum,
but if you like Led Zep and Genesis then whatever it is I'll hate it!).
Controversy, it’s marvellous, but at least I'm doing something different
enough to shake’em a little bit. They can say what they like, if I didn't like
Mamma it would never have got released. It's like acid rock in the 60's, you
know, weird experimental stuff that was definitely not chart music but at
least they were trying to advance music, go beyond established
boundaries. That's what I'm trying to do with games; that’s what resulted
in Mama and Psych /Colourspace.

I still feel that review rating systems need looking at. At the moment all
the reviewers tend to put in a lot of subjective stuff which would vary
widely from one reviewer to another, even from day to day. I think the
worst culprits for this are PCN, where they have a large ‘tick’ or ‘cross’ by
each review. This smacks far too much of ‘playing God’... if I was on such a
panel, for example, I'd be biased against ladders & platforms games, ‘cos
they're my own personal pet hates. Someone else might enjoy them,
though, so it’s not down to me to say ‘no, don't buy this’: that’s just my
opinion, a fact that isn't stressed enough in the majority of reviews.

No, the best way to do a review, I think, would be to give ratings for
quantifiabie things like graphics, sonic effects, complexity of play, depth of
play, technical competence etc., and then allow the reviewer to express an
opinion if he must, clearly indicated as such. That would avoid the sort of
schizophrenic gamut of varying opinions that Mama ended up with, and
which I'm sure plagues other designers too. The one thing reviews

shouldn't try to say is ‘buy this it’s zarjaz’ or ‘don't buy this it's awful’
After all one person may hate a game whereas another person might think
it's zarjaz, If the second person read a review written by the first person
he'd get totally the wrong idea, y’see? It'd be okay to say ‘don't buy this
because it’s terribly bugged and crashes a lot’. but definitely wrong to say
‘don't buy this ‘cos I don’t like the style’. Opinions are for swapping with
your mates, not for publishing as buy-directives in magazines

Anyway, I can now give you my opinion on the ‘Empire Strikes Back’
convesion for the Star Wars machine, ‘cos I've just got it! It's even more of
a blast than ‘Star Wars’, the Probots on the first wave are very enthusiastic
about the fireballs. The best wave is undoubtedly the second wave, the
Imperial Walkers... You ever want to play Attack of the Mutant Camels in
3-D? Well this is it, you can zoom all around the camels, either shooting
them in the red eye or firing ropes out which tangle round their legs,
bringing them crashing down with a satisfying crump. You even get ‘trick
flying’ bonus points for flying between their legs. As in AMC of old there's
a scanner at the top of the screen showing the camels’ progress towards the
Rebel Base; when they reach the right-hand edge then it's "Prepare for the
Jump to lightspeed! and you're into wave 3, a TIE fighter battle amongst
the stars just like Wave 1 of the Star Wars game, but much more vicious.
Once through these you hear the voice of C3PO informing you of the
unlikely odds for surviving the asteroid shower which rushes towards you.
(Difficult bit this. Those asteroids are hard to dodge), According to my
(American) conversion kit manual there should be TIEs in amongst the
asteroids but I've not seen any yet, maybe that’s on higher waves than I've
yet achieved. After the asteroids it’s back round again for more of the
same.

To say the action is ‘fast’ is an understatement. This game is mean and
powerful, and to survive it's blast, blast, blast all the way. I got the
xversion boards down from London and fitted them yesterday afternoon,
and now my arms, wrists and trigger fingers are really knackered. The
speech synthesis, as with Star Wars, is excellent; C3PO sounds really
worried all the time, Darth is menacing, threatening ‘He will join us, or die!’
and the Emperor's there, ‘the son of Skywalker must NOT become a Jedi...”
and of course Obi-Wan warns of the dangers of the Dark Side (and I don't
think he's talking Pink Floyd either!),

There's JED! bonuses to be earned, too, which give you the power of the
Force for about 20 seconds, during which all enetny shots are rendered
harmiess. The game also has the of Tempest hook of allowing you to start
on the highest wave you reached, but only if you play again immediately.
Kept me in the booth for eons & would have cost me a fortune in 10p’s if
I'd had to pay!

Anyway if you liked Star Wars then you're gonna LOVE this one
Definitely a case for nipping down the nearest. arcade & checking their Star
Wars machines to see if they've been converted. Maybe the boys at
Realtime can get on the beam & produce a version of ‘Empire’ as good as
that Star Strike...

4: High Score update

These are just a few updates, the full list will be in the next issue. We
now have an official Hover Bovver hi-score, and Cippy is still being worked
on relentlessly. I still hold the Mama Llama hi-CF, no-one's beaten me yet
that I've heard from. So the updates are as follows:

Ancipital new hi score=33,572,956 with 100%
(David Hall)

Hover Bovver official best= 169,636 lawn 16
(M.F.Robingon)}

Mietagalactic Llamas hi score=457,143 on level 41
(Stephen Browning)

Oh yeah, can anyone who got a copy of Syncro off either the Net or out of
the magazine beat my best (I've forgotten the score except that it was >5k,
but what I'm really interested in is how far people are getting).

Hyncro- reached Level 5 Round 2
(Wak)

Pull your fingers out and let's see someone really crack Mama Llama.
Normally my own best scores are beaten a few weeks after the game
comes out, but Mama seems to be holding you off pretty well, I'm still the
best (yak yak) Thing is, | usually get beaten fairly quickly ‘cos I don't
have time to play the game a lot once it’s done, in defence of my own score.
Mama I'm still pretty good at though, ‘cos it’s one of the few games I play
regularly on my Commodore. (I play a lot of stuff once or twice, but only a
tiny percentage of my game stash is regularly used).

5: Bitz

(which reminds me: don't those Bitz bars just taste amazing??? You
know, it’s half 2 in the morning, you've been watching a video or
something and suddenly: munchies. You rush to the fridge and grab a
Coke and a cold Bitz bar... Nothing better for when you get those raving
Munchies...)

Since last Beast I've managed to revisit Egypt for a spot more camel
research. went out past the Pyramids and into the desert on a camel,
preceded by this Arab bloke on a horse, after about an hour you figure
youre out in the middle of nowhere and you're starting to think "hey wow,

this is reaily zarjaz, just like Dune”, but then you come over a sand dune
and there's an old Arab guy sitting on the sand with a bucket full of bottles
of Pepsi, rather spoils the illusion... [t's weird, the whole area around Giza
and the pyramids is geared to ensuring that the tourist and his Egyptian
pounds are soon parted. Nonetheless, the place is really interesting, the
lightshow around the Pyramids at night is good and would be even better
to the accompaniment of Dark Side or Steve Hillage’s Rainbow Dome
Musick. And there are lots of camels.

Back in the UK, we now have Psychedelia versions ready for the MSX and
Amstrad micros as well as my Atari version. Speaking of MSX, I've been
playing around with Yamaha’s MSX CX5M with the music keyboard. This
device contains a really zarjaz §-channel polyphonic synthesiser which is
just amazing fun to play around with. What I'm really interested in is
getting hold of an Atari XEM micro (the same as an XE but with Atari's new
sound synth chip in, and a MIDI port) and connecting it to the MIDI out of
the Yamaha synth. Then, with a little tweaking to Atari Colourspace, you'd
have a system whereby playing at the music keyboard both generated
sound and simultaneously operated Colourspace... trouble is, there’s some
doubt whether the XEM computer will ever appear now. I might have to
wait and use the MIDI on the 520ST.

I'm now standing by to start my next C64 game I've already got the title
and design worked out, so now I'm just going to start coding and see what
happens. I'm hoping to demo a subgame or 2 at the Commodore show in
June, so if you want a preview come along. Watch out for a brainblastingly
good hi-res loading piccy on the new one, too.. we've never had loading
Piccies before, for the very good reason that I can't draw to save me life,
but this one we got lined up is brilliant.

The ski-ing in Italy was really good, although I knackered both my hands
fairly severely after ploughing in at a fair rate of knots following an
abortive and unintentional attempt at ski-jumping. There was even a
Defender machine in one of the restaurants halfway up the mountain
which was good for a fix once in a while, the Italians were useless at it, too,
allowing me to command the hi-score table. The Italians were also well
freaked out by my long hair, I don't think they get much out there, and I
was known to all the lift attendants as either ‘Jesus Christ’ or Frank Zappa’!
I still reckon there'd be scope for a really good ski-ing game, not one of
your boring ‘get through the gates without missing any, as fast as you can’
types, but something more along the lines of ‘scream down the mountain at
mach 8, accompanied by heavy rock music, earning bonus points for wiping
out other skiers, knocking people off the ski lifts, and especially large
bonuses for taking out entire ski school classes’. You could call it Gordon
Bennet Gets Piste and use the same character from Hover Bovver.

You might have seen my bit in Zzap 64 by now. The mag is OK, not
brilliant, it's a bit too much like CRASH for me, reviews reading like they
were written BY 12-year-olds FOR 12-year-olds (although they haven't yet
sunk to Crash’s depths of describing stuff as “brill’) and they do rather
come across as the sort of people who're so amazingly primitive that they

still believe in charts. Still, there’s room for improvement, maybe I'll be
able to subvert them from the inside (although I doubt it) Nonetheless you
do get a nice lot of screen piccys, and as long as you take the reviews with
a pinch of salt (the reviewers are mutant) the whole thing’s not too bad I
suppose. Although I still preferred the old PCG.

6: Some Zarjaz Things To Do

Go and see 2010 at the cinema. It’s really ace and there are some
really good special FX. There's a great sequence with an apparently
joystick -controlied probe which would make a great video game.

Score a CF of over 200 on Mama. I'd really like to see this done- I've
had 192 but can’t crack that 200

Go down your local arcade and see if the Star Wars have been
converted. You'll like it a lot if they have.

Read Brian Aidiss’ Helliconia stories. The last one Helliconia Winter’
has just come out and, like the others, it’s really brilliant. These and the
‘Dune’ series are some of the best SF I've ever read

Be at Knebworth on June 22nd.

Get hold of a cheap Atari §00. There are old ‘800s going for
ludicrously low prices, and it'd be worth having one just to play Jaggi Lines,
Star Raiders and Colourspace (if you're into Psych).

Fly between the camels’ legs. Extended playing has revealed that this
is the key to getting big scores on The Empire Strikes Back.

Learn 68000. You may need it some day.

Watch ‘The Flip Side of Dominick Hide’ if you can get hold of a video
from someone (If you saw it when it was on TV, watch it again).

Listen to ‘Stargazer’ at apocalyptic volumes. You will not regret it at
all

Look for rainbows. You might find yourself in Colourspace....

Keep thoee laser2 Disrin’ till next time... the new game #hould be a lot of fan, turnup to the
Commodore show an’ try out the first eubgeme, I'd be interested to hear any comments... I have o
requeet to mention someone called Fat Filin the neweletter.. any relation to Fat Freddie? Does
anyone out there have s video of “Another Flip for Dominick"? If so, can we borrow at please, we
reed to see it!!! Anyone else have any idese for Zarjse Things To Do? Must finish now, etay
aheepish and trridegcent, contact me on the Net (either Compu- or Synchronistic).....

SS ts Ss SN Q S SS
e RA a

a | e

 

Re tes

”

 

Toe Rature of *o

ie ane:
se
hve
pe

be at
ie
i

he

ie
hae

ee)

 

Sixth Shaggy Submission... Controversy Issue
BATALYX: The Raid on ZZYAK PRIME... completed at last!
ATARI 520 ST: YAK learns the Way of the Exploding 68000...
AMIGA: YAK gets hooves-on’ test of the megamachine...

1: BATALYX is finished.

After about four months’ work I've finally done my,'64 game BATALYX.
A lot of the early design ideas for this one came while I was on holiday
earlier this year. What I wanted was a break from my 100-wave-type of
game that I’ve been doing a lot of recently, and I had the idea of doing six
separate games, each of which could be played as a game in its own right,
and then integrate all of them together into a multi-game package. I liked
the idea of being able to go from one game to the next at will, without any
restraints of ‘you can't do level x until all of level y is ‘done’.

Once BATALYX play is started, you can at: any time jump between the
six sub-games; the comptiter keeps track of where you were within each
game, and restores your position when you re-enter: You have unlimited
lives within the games; at the start of play you choose how fong a gi me you
want (from 5 mins. up to around 1.5 hours). You can then play until ‘you
run out of time or you terminate play. fe

Within each level there are goals to be achieved, yeilding point and
‘Completion Icon’ symbols. These should be taKen into account as a *
measure of skilful play just as much as the points score. There are five
icons, and so far in my best game I managed to get four - and- three-
quarters of the icons.

The game has 5 different levels of play each with their own hi-scores a
bit like the 5 game-states of Mama Llama. The six sub -games. have themes
‘as follows:

Subgame 1: Hallucin-O-Bomblets. This is a rather strange
Asteroid-derivitive, I suppose You control a circular rotating ship thingy
(looking a bit like the KillDroid in Mama). By leaning your stick you can
fire bullets which act as reaction mass and move your ship So you have to
fire where you DONT want to go.... There are 16 different hostile types to
blast

Subgame 2: AMC ][. For all of those who'd like to see AMC re-worked
up to more modern standards. Featuring 2 bullets each for you and the
beasties, a smooth-scrolling background instead of the chunk-rez, up to 3
camels attacking on screen at once, and camels that jump and squat, and an
improved scanner. | had to put this in- I did enjoy writing AMC in those
early days, and had a hankering to bring it up to date.

Subgame 3: The Activation of Iridis Base. This is probably the
most abstract of the six. It's basically a reaction-game with a couple of
weird features. There are some nice perspective-effect sphere trails, and a
nice Dark -Side-of -the-Moon -album-cover-effect when the Base is
activated

Subgame 4: Cippy on the Run featuring everybody's favourite
man/goat hybrid looking as harassed as ever, attempting to cover every
surface on a dual-planet structure a la Sheep in Space, whilst under the
influence of some more of my gravity and inertia routines There are some
nice psychedelic Bonus Run sequences every two levels as well Blasting is
to be had too, there are grey spheres which tend to ricochet about and
upset the structure of the surfaces, with unpredictable results for the
Horned Hero.

Subgame 5: Syncro }{ being a bit of a follow-on from Syncro | which
some of you may have come across on the Net or in Commodore Horizons
This is a geometric, abstract sort of puzzle which calls for a bit of thought
as well as being pretty nifty on the stick. It also contains a bit of musical
experimentation I've been playing around with. Use of the joystick in the
game causes modification of a simple chord. The effects are weird and not
entirely bad. Sometumes you find yourself drifting off playing around with
the sonics and forget about the game!

Subgame 6: Psychedelia well 1 was going to put in a PAUSE mode,
but | thought it'd be much more interesting if, instead of freezing the
screen, | let the player relax with a spot of PSYCHEDELIA. This subset
contains commands to change symmetry, speed, and screen colours, and is
nice to drop into after a spot of hectic battle in the other phases

Those are the elements, then The game will be available on both disk
and tape. Look out for a secret message hidden within the game, and a
zarjaz hi-res title screen drawn by Mo Warden, the winner of the Official

Ancipital Excuse competition a while back.

2: Controversy...

It seems that our friends at 2ZAP got a bit, er, flustered shall we say, by
my spot of criticism last issue. I don't really see why they got so upset, ‘cos
the criticism wasn't even totally damning, and it was only published in
Nature anyway, which is circulated only to Llama fans and not widely
enough to dent Zzap’s reputation I'm sure. Anyway, ZZAP’s rather OTT
response tends to prove what I was criticising them for in the first place-
but I'm sure they ll get over it.

My column- which was banished from Zzap after the aforementioned
incident- is now being published in Commodore Horizons, along with the
‘code for Syncro }{ which I did for them. I have given BATALYX to C&VG
for them to have a pre-release look at, so look out for the first review of
the game to come from them.

3: After Batalyx....?

Now BATALYX is done, I’m in the process of putting COLORSPACE onto
my Atari 520 ST. I've only had a colour monitor for a short while, Atari's
video output is a touch nonstandard. I borrowed a monitor for a while off
Atari, then Microvitec sent down a CUB monitor set up specially to work on
the ST, and this is now running happily. COLOURSPACE's core routines are
just starting to come together, symmetry, priority, pattern-logic and that
sort of stuff. It’s my first dip into the world of 68000, and my first ever
program in the ST, so I'm finding it pretty interesting and great fun. Colour
on the ST is very sharp and vivid. The program looks like having a
resolution of 160 pixels across by 100 down, mouse-control rather than
joystick, and (I hope) foreground and background ‘overlay’ graphics to run
your patterns over. I'm trying a slight modification of the colour algorithm
too.

The ST will be my focus for a while, but 1] also have a new game idea for
the '64 just taking shape nicely at the moment. I should also be getting my
hands on AMIGA fairly shortly and Colourspace will have to get written for
that machine too. That should REALLY be fun- | already know 68000 code
so 1 ll just be able to dive straight in and start making those lovely graphics
chips work for their living...

We've also got a conversion on the way, Colourspace for the Beeb no
less, on a rez. of 60 pixels across. We're also putting together a compilation
tape of games called YAK’S PROGRESS, which will contain 6 games showing
the progress of Liama stuff from AMC through to Ancipital. We figure this
to be a good intro to the Way of the Beast for those who have not tried
Liama games in the past and who are perhaps a little daunted by
something as complex as Mama Llama. The compilation lets them get their
heads into that state in easy stages.

4: PCW ‘85...
As I write this I've just come back from PCW ‘85, where I saw some

quite interesting stuff... we were there, running BATALYX over the entire
show period on three ‘64s, it was never left unplayed which is very
promising. I got to do COLOURSPACE on Ariola’s giant Video Wall, that was
really zarjaz! The computer graptiics were mixed with pop videos in real
time, and the effects were really acell We had crowds of people stopping
to stare at the resultant video show... there's a lot of potential in the Psych/
Colourspace idea for that sort of thing, and it’s still my ambition to go
behind people like Genesis or Floyd using such a system... I also got to
demo BATALYX on the Wall, too; that was great, the little Ancipital was
about three feet high on that giant screen, and the sonix were MEGALOUD
just like they should be!

Also at PCW I got my first hands-on go of the AMIGA. I got into a demo
on the METACOMCO stand on the first day (thanks to Guy Kewney getting
me in), and I also was invited to one of Commodore's official demos for
journalists and software developers. AMIGA is totally mindblowing. It is
without doubt the best micro I have ever seen. It can play music like any
musical instrument you care to name. All you do is record the sound of
your choice into the machine and it'll then play that sound at any pitch. In
terms of graphics, the system has dedicated chips for animation, 4096
colours and absolutely blinding speed (AMIGA draws filled polygons faster
than a lot of systems plot pixels). One demo we were shown had a
32-colour display of city streets with animated robots walking around on
them; the robots weren't sprites but BOBs (Blitter Objects), bit-images
drawn directly to the screen bitmap by the Blitter (Bit Manipulator I think
that stands for). All priority stuff and background restoration was looked
after by the machine. You could pick up the mouse and move the window
in which this scene was displayed- and the animation continued even while
the screen was moving... Another demo had a bouncing, rotating ball -
itself about half the screen high - bouncing around on the screen, and a
loud booming noise (created by one of AMIGA’s designers hitting a garage
door with a foam baseball bat) being generated- in stereo- at each bounce.
The AMIGA can also speak perfectly clearly in both male and female
voices; run loads of programs all at the same time in different windows;
mix TV images with its own graphics... it'd be easier to make a list of what
it COULDN'T do... As for games, there'll be plenty of those; I flew a
half-finished version of a flight simulator (written by the same author as
the original IBM one), and there was no trace of the jerkiness usually
associated with such programs, just excellent, solid 3D graphics. The jet
noise in the program was ace, and.someone said that it had been created
by just going to an airport and recording the real thing. Electronic Arts in
America already have AMIGA systems and are working on stuff like the
Pinball Construction Set and Skyfox, and also Marble Madness; the
resolution of the AMIGA version promises to be as good as the original
arcade machine; I'm not going to buy MM as | was once thinking of doing,
‘coz 1 should be getting an AMIGA soon, and I'll play it on there... Firebird

also have some machines here in the UK and are working on a title called
STARGLIDER, a 3D Elite-style game but with solid 3D rather than
wireframe. J shail be producing for the AMIGA too.

Atari ST owners look set to get some decent games, too. STARGLIDER
mentioned above is being converted to the ST as well as AMIGA; Lucasfilm
are doing RESCUE ON FRACTALUS; Atari are working on STAR RAIDERS II
(drool drool); and I saw the beginnings of some nice stuff on demo at PCW:
English Software had a nice PolePosition on demo, as well as some 3D
spaceship routines like in ELITE but solid; that old Imagine project called
BANDERSNATCH looks like surfacing on the ST, half the old Liverpudlian
team were there with a fairly advanced version of the game which they
plan to release for ST, Amiga and Macintosh, and which has some nice
animation of the main character, a behelmeted spaceman who's pretty
nifty with a sword. Someone was running a still-screen of JOUST which
you couldn't tell from the arcade version. 1 demoed my own COLOURSPACE
in an early stage of development (COLOURSPACE with a mouse is just
beyond belief. The curves are just AMAAAAZZING)).

Loads of people seem to think that AMIGA threatens ST. Maybe in the
high-end business area it does, but not in the home market. People coming
up to 16bits from their 64s and Ataris are not going to be able to fork out
the grand-plus for the AMIGA, zarjaz though it is.

 

What they can do, however, is get an excellent entry-level 68000 system in
the Atari 260 STD; this is planned by Atari to cost about £400, and include
a single floppy and have 256k of RAM. All the graphics, etc. are exactly as
for the 520 ST. You can run it thru a normal TV or get a monitor if you
need the extra clarity. The AMIGA, however, is definitely THE micro if
you're rich. It is the machine for creative people. Musicians and artists will
be using AMIGA- odds on you'll see one on Top of the Pops before too long.
If you're in a company, you can justify its expense by using it as a business
tool- it'll run lots of business stuff megafast- then nip it home and immerse
yourself in Marble Madness and Starglider and Colourspace to your hearts
content...

So Amiga and ST don't really conflict on the home level. Most home
users can only dream of AMIGA, but they can go and get Atari’s machine
which is still pretty brilliant by comparison with what we've got at the
moment, and is really zarjaz value for money.

5: New Games

In the arcades, some of the more recent releases are worth a mention:
there's a really cute platform game that runs on the Atari System One
machines (of Marble Madness fame). Called Pack Rat, it’s about a cute little
rat who runs about over various nicely -detailed screens collecting bottles,
jewels and other objects whilst pursued by various hostiles. He can stun
these pursuers by throwing stuff at them, and he does a little jig with his
ratty nose in the air when he successfully brings all the objects back to his
nest. The music is excellent- the sound synthesiser in that System One is
really impressive.

There's also a new Pole Position-type game I had my first go of the
other day. Called Hang On, it is a fairly standard PolePos type except for
one thing- the game is mounted upon a lifesize model of a motorcycle with
the screen between the handlebars. You control the game by leaning the
whole machine over in the direction you want to turn! Quite weird at first
but you soon get the hang of it.

Fans of that Commando game in the arcades, the one where you're a
soldier and you battle your way thru enemy lines, would be well advised
to get a look at Alligata’s Who Dares Wins. Written by Steve Evans, one of
the best 64 hackers about (he did Guardian, Alligata’s ace Defender clone,
and Rocket Roger, which was good but very very hard), the game is a close
copy of the original and has excellent sprite handling routines; Evans has
developed some really nice dynamic-raster-interrupt routines which he
used in Guardian to get lots of stuff on screen at once, and Who Dares Wins
features plenty of action too. Highly recommended if you don't mind the
fact that the images being blown away aren't abstract alien shapes, but
little human forms...

Speaking of Defender, Guardian has finally been eclipsed by Dropzone as
Best Defender Clone in my opinion. What makes Dropzone especially
enjoyable is the solid planet surface, the megazarjaz explosion when you
get boffed, and the sheer speed of the action. There are one or two twists

to the action which make the gamepiay a littie different from Defender, but
not enough to worry about. The sonixx are ace too, deep and menacing like
all good Defenders should be. The only thing better than this is my
Stargate machine.

I'd love to see a really good clone of Star Force, too. That's a pure
blast’em'‘up from the arcades, with some very pretty scrolling backgrounds
and plenty of mayhem. They've got one down Southampton Ice Rink and
when I'm too knackered from skating around I'll often knock off for a few
blasts of Star Force.

Whilst I'm still on about games I'd better mention Hyper Sports. The
game itself is pretty good, licensed from Konami it’s pretty faithful to the
real thing, with six events covering swimming, shooting, vaulting, triple
jump, weight lifting and archery. What makes it, however, is the loading
music. It's wonderful. Put it thru your stereo and have a listen. They
could almost release it as a singie! There's quite a nice rendering of
Vangelis’ Chariots of Fire theme within the game, as well. No medal
ceremony though, I guess with six events and all that music they were
running a little tight on memory. Nice if you like the sports games, worth
it for the loading music! I've also had a brief look at Summer Games 2, not
enough to give a valid opinion, but what I saw looks good; watching the
little guy throwing the javelin was just like seeing it on the box! The
animation looks really zarjaz. And there are some beasties in it, horses in
fact, so it can't be bad!

New from Activision soon is Coriolis Rift from Lucasfilm. I saw this
briefly at PCW running on an Atari and despite my efforts to hassle
Activision for a copy they weren't giving (ah well, you can but try)... It
uses similar fractal landscape generation to Fractalus and you sit in a tank
driving over green mountains. Much more I cannot say cos I only had a
brief look in passing, but it looks good. If it’s half as good as the last two
Lucas games on the Atari it'll be worth having. I saw Fractalus running on
the ‘64, it’s not quite as smooth as the Atari version but not too bad
nonetheless. Activision have even been quoting me in their adverts, they
didn't even ask me, cheeky...

Allin all, then, there are still plenty of good games being put out for
the '64, and the future looks bright for both the new Atari ST and the
Amiga, as far as games are concerned. The arcades are a little slow to get
any really exciting stuff in, but hopefully with games as good as Marble
Madness being produced this should change for the better. I've also heard
of ‘simulator-type’ arcade games being produced in America; games
mounted on hydraulics which actually move the game booth about in
response to the player's control motions. That would be really good and
make it worthwhile going down the arcades again- part of the reason for
the current arcade game siump is that people can stay home and play
games on their micros- but unless you're mega-rich and have lots of space,
I can't imagine hydraulically-activated games ever being installed for
home use! When you go down the arcade, it should be to play stuff that’s
not even remotely possible at home.

6: An Announcement and a little Hype

First the announcement. We are moving the Beast mailing list over to
the Sirius at the moment. We would like all those who wish to continue to
receive the newsletter to write and tell us so, please; those not replying
we'll assume to have lost interest, or blown up their computers or
whatever. This should hopefully stop people getting multiple copies too-
some people have complained of getting 4 or 5 issues!

Now the hype. We have a few of the following titles at reduced prices:

Disks: Six Quid Each for the 64...
***@ucipital

***Hhover Bovver

***Revenge of the Mutant Camels
Tapes: Two Quid Fifty for the 64
***Zaser Zone

*** Matrix

***@ridrunner

*** Hellgate

*** Metagalactic Llamas

***Sttack of the Mutant Camels
Vie-20 Tapes: Two Quid Each (¥=unexpanded)
***byuctor ¥

***ZaserZoue

*°** Matrix

***Gridrunner¥

*** Hellgate

*** Metagalactic Liamas¥

We also have T-shirts available in Llamasoft (black with round logo) and
Mama Llama/Psychedelia (Mama on front, Psych on back) designs; price ts
£2 50 each, state size when ordering pleez

I am sorry to introduce a heavy, breadhead, hyping ADVERT into the
mag but us programmers, we got to earn a living see, and if I didn't do this
1d have to open up my lab as an arcade and start charging everyone 10pa
go to play the games, and then I'd never get any peace to get my work
done and there'd be no zarjaz Colourspace on the ST and that wouldn't do
at all. (Not a bad excuse huh?)

@ os Endos

Almost finished this issue now. I'm legging it toGreecefor a little
horizontal activity of the solar nature next week. I figure I've earned it, all
that 68000-learning and all those late nites on the Net have taken their toll
and after our non-summer | could use a little sun. Rest assured that I'll be
thinking about my new projects for both ‘64 and ST, and lusting after an
Amiga which I should receive shortly after I get back. I'm also trying to
set up a little ski-ing for myself this Christmas along with a couple of guys
from the Net and Tony Crowther, which could be a good laugh all round.

Now a plug for the Laserium in London. Since being turned on to it
during the Commodore show, I have been a regular visitor to the
Planetarium for the nightly laser shows. They're really zarjaz. Basically
they're what I've been trying to get at with Psych and Colourspace, except
that instead of a couple of hundred quidsworth of hardware, this show uses
100 grandsworth of laserligntsynth projected into a dome. The effect is
stunning and if you're ever in London don't miss it. As from the 26th Sept
there are two shows, Laser FX which is a selection of tracks including
works by Jean-Michel Jarre, the Art of Noise, ZZ Top, Tangerine Dream, the
Eurythmics and Mick Jagger to name but a few. The other show is a Led
Zep show which ought to be zarjaz, ] haven't seen it yet ‘coz it doesn't start
tall the 26th and I shall be in Corfu and unable to cop the first night, worse
luck. I have faith in the laserist. The show will be zarjaz. The Laserium
costs £2.95 to get in (reductions fur students), and the shows run at 6pm,
7.30pm and 9pm each night. The Planetarium is right by Baker Street
tube. PSYCH-heads: this one’s not to be missed...

Anyway that’s it for this issue Commodorians, don't worry about all
this Amiga and ST stuff, I won't desert you, there will be a new ‘64 project
starting soon. ] would like to do more Atari stuff too if I get the time
We'll see- at the moment EVERYONE wants me to write for THEIR particular
machine and I don't know if I'm coming or going! Still 1 am a Commodore
bod at heart, and I do enjoy pluggin’ the 64...

] hope you all enjoy BATALYX as much as | enjoyed writing it. Get
modems if you can afford it and go on line to Compunet, it’s really zarjaz.
Lots of good Commodorebashers out there. Read Cerebus the Aardvark
stories Come to the October Commodore show and join us for a blast. Pray
that the Amiga gets a lot cheaper. Watch Max Headroom. Go to Peru. If you
can't manage that just go to a zoo and meditate on camels and llamas whilst
listening to Incantations on your Walkman Get all five icons. Listen to
Tomita. Drink Newcastle Brown. Stay up all night on the Net

 

Thie neweletter wae brought to you by me sitting ap half the right amd typing Thenxx to everyone
who'se taken the trouble to write tome. I'm sorry if the newsletter seems « bit irregular inits
delivery timez, you see it's usually only produced when I've just finished » project end if I spend
* long time on any one thing it gets held up. Pics I've been finding it very hard to cope with my
Inoe Kole withdrewal symptoms. I'm afraid Coke ie no substitute for the REAL real thing

 

the Nature of the Beast.....

 

Bakspeak the Eighth
zarjaz colourspace launch
new amiga stuff
spindizzy

iridis aipha

1: The Lights in the Dome...

As I hinted at the end of the last issue, we did a rather special launch
for the Atari ST version of Colourspace. I thought it'd be a really neat thing
to do if we hired out the Laserium, and did the launch in there. Eventually
the idea turned into proper plans, and on the evening of the 10th Feb we
went into the Dome with 2 gigantic video systems, each 6 feet by 6, anda
lightshow worked out for five excellent tracks. Despite early hassles
setting the rig up (the Atari wouldn't talk to the Barco projection systems)
the show was great fun; first I did a forty-minute set, then there was
adjournment for beer, then a 26-minute laser show (to Genesis), then more
beer, then we finished off with a Colourspace/Laser duette to Stairway to
Heaven. Well cool | can tell you...

The ST ‘Space is now finished, packaged and in full production. We took
our first batch to the Atari Show at Hammersmith, where I gave
demonstrations on the hour, every hour, using my own projection system
against one wall of the stand. We had crowds 3 deep round the stand all
day, decent music, and we were just about cleaned out of ST Colourspace
by the end of it. I was encouraged to see so much enthusiasm...

2: Ahead, Warp Factor 5

With my first 68000 project successfully completed (whew!)), I have
blown the dust off my ‘64 rig, fired up the 128 that I bought at the
Horizons show, booted the assembler and got down to my next '64 game,
The title of the game is to be Iridis-Alpha, the name coming from a tie-in
with the Iridis-Base construction of subgame 3 in Batalyx. The scam this
time is that once Iridis Base had been activated, Humanoid forces
discovered there a message capsule containing the co-ordinates of
Iridis-Alpha, the long-deserted homeworld of the Iridians, an ancient and
peaceful race who were possessed of a marvellous technology far in
advance of any that Humankind possessed, and doubtless pretty nifty
against the Zzyaxians if we could get hold of it. Unfortunately, the Iridians,
evolving spontaneously into beings of pure colour one day, decided that
their new forms would look nicer against a backdrop of interstellar
nebulae, and left their homeworld deserted. Unfortunate for you, that ts,
because, not wanting the barbaric races populating the Universe at that
time to spoil their old planet, they installed lots of nasty and distinctly
high-tech defences to discourage casual visitors. (Peaceful they might have
been; dumb they were not)

Not least problematic of these defences is the bi-existentialistic field
that pervades Iridis-Alpha, permitting the planet to exist in two reality
states at one time. (And that’s two reality states out of a possible five). All
five reality-states are possessed of numerous levels of sophisticated
defences for you to biast (or at least they will be when I finish writing the
alien driver module). Your display shows both realities at once; one is
quite straightforward, but unfortunately the other one is inverted, scrolls

in the opposite direction, and has mirrored controls, As you battle you. can:
transfer from one reality to the other at will, and also collect up energy
that you have to deliver to the deactivation system (which is reached by 3
distinctly weird route. Heavily defended of course}.

To aid you in all this mayhem you have under your control a distinctly
cute little robot that can waik along fhe surface of the planet (in a very
spider-like manner too, I might add); leap over obstacles with much
waving of legs, even take off and become 4 fast fighter with a suitably loud
and lethal laser cannon. As for transferring the energy, my only adwice to
you is that you practise your Batalyx Phase One and your Marbie Madness,
and perhaps you'll be OK.

The code is coming along fine, I'm using the 126 to assemble on and
running it on the "64, a bit slower than the Apple rig I used to use, but the
128 has more memory. Ill finish itin maybe 4a couple of months, but |
hope to have a little demo ready at least in tire for the Commodore show.
I did quite a lot of the work for it in France, | popped back te La Plagne for
a spot more ski-ing and took a 124 with me this fime in order to do a little
coding in between ski-ing and the bar. The ski-ing was ace, lots more snow
than fast time, and some really nice weather, sun and amazing cloud
formations and Jean-Michel Jarre on the day I had the Transcendental
Chairlift Ride... amazing! Mind you, there was the odd blizzard and one
day of really wet horrible snow, one run and you were soaked and you had
to stand on a gradient of more than 45 degrees before you'd move the
snow was that sficky. Buf for the most part the snow was ideal and I hada
great time, and got some work done so I needn't feel too guilty about it,
Guinness was £3 3 pint though. Heavy.

I read a French computer mag while I was out there, Tilt it was called,
sort of like the French equivalent of C&VG. It had a review of Batatyx in it,
from what I could decipher they seemed to like it, anyway they did a
really ace cartoon of a big, gormless grinning camel all over the page which
looked great. The French gamers seem a keen bunch, still into the Mattel
and Coleco systems quite heavily but a healthy C64 band, but the main
machine in France at the moment is without doubt the Amstrad. French
chipheads are Ammstrad-crazy. In a single newsagent I counted five
Amstrad magazines, two Apple and no Commodore ones at all! A couple
years back the Oric was all the rage in France, and now the Amstrad. Mind
you they are displaying a healthy interest in the new Atari STs (put then
who isnt?)

Anyway to return to the subject of Iridis-Alpha, I have this problem...
the little robot thingy is so cute we think it should get a nice cute name like
R2-D2 or something. Troubie is, I can't think of any, so if anyone suggests
a decent one and I decide to use it I'll give them a free copy of I-A as soon
asitisfinished. To give you inspiration I have illustrated the offending
@roid (see piccys below). >

—

a

3: What's New

Aside from Iridis, I have a couple of other new bits and pieces coming
out.... remember Matrix? Of course you do... not much flashy graphics or
mega-tunes, just a raw blast, a little dated by today’s standards but still
fun. Thing is, a mate of mine has just done a conversion of it onto C- 16,
and the conversion actually plays better than the original... it blasts like
crazy! The day I got it I sat up until half-3 just giving ‘em hell, and the
following nicht me and a mate repeated the experience on the Barco this
time, It doesn't look that flashy but it sure has one heli of a hook. We'll be
releasing the C-16 Matrix, and another conversion, of Laser Zone, at the
Commodore show in May.

On the Amiga front I have had a little luck, still no Marble Madness yet,
but 1] have an almost-finished version of Commodore's forthcoming
Musicraft program that does an awesome Axel-F demo (especially good
hooked into the stereo}, There’s an amazing synth module with all the
different sorts of controls that you might find on a Moog, and with which 9,
complete novice can soon be creating some excellent effects. There's a
library of example effects too, some of which are well Pink Floyd I can tell
you.

Also, I was up at Ariola the other day and managed to tax three Amiga
programs from them, EA stuff that they'll be distributing in England. EA
stuff is just about the only truly finished leisure software for the Amiga
that I've ever seen (apart from Psygnosis’s Brataccas}. I already have
DPaint, a truly amazing art package that really shows the power of the
Amiga; and the three programs I got last week are One-on-One, Archon
and Seven Cities of Gold. They are all titles that have previously been
on release for C64 and Atari, but the Amiga versions are obviously better
in most respects. One-on-One is 4 basketball simulation, not of a full game
but of two famous American players playing one-on-one, sort of a
mini-game for two. The gameplay didn't captivate me, probably because I
know next to nothing about basketball and can't appreciate the subtteties
that are doubtless incorporated in the action. However, one feature that
everyone can appreciate is the marvellous sampled sonix. The basketball
bounces with an authentic sound, but best of all there are digitised crowd
noises that realiy add to the atmosphere: if you listen carefully you can
actually hear people selling hot-dogs, cold beer and ice-cold Coke! Archon
you may ke familiar with from the C64, it’s a sort of chess-type strategy
game where players must do arcade-style battle to capture opponent's
pieces. The game is excellent. (I have become quite an addict} and once
again the sonix are great: phoenixes burst into roaring fireballs, trolls roll
huge boulders from speaker to speaker in stereo, and bowmen’s arrows are
accompanied by an amusing ‘twang’. The third game, Seven Cities of
Gold, I have only glanced at as yet, but it is an adventure-type game done
with graphics and many action sequences in which you play the part of 4
Spanish Conquistador discovering the New World. You sail away, discover
what you may, and then return to Spain and the pub to recount your tale

(and save the game). The game's origins (it was originally for Atari) are
obvious in that the graphics were ported across rather than designéd for
the Amiga; nonetheless if you like this kind of game 1t seems quite good.
Written by the same team who did Mule. Still no sign of Marble Madness,
but after talking to Ariola I get the impression that we should look out for
its first appearence at the Commodore show. | hope so, they better hurry
up or else someone 'll bring out an Amiga or ST version of Spindizzy....

4: Battles

I've been doing a fair bit of battling recently, and I'll tell you about
some of the best... I finally made my escape from Targ in Novagen’s
excellent Mercenary, it took me about three days’ solid play, but it was
good fun. I like the style of the game, which is strictly speaking an
adventure, but thanks te Paul Woakes’ excellent 3-D routines you can see
the world you're adventuring in and actually move around in it and relate
to objects in it. Beats the old textual ‘you are in a large hangar. there is a
spaceship here’ approach-- must be good if it can get a hardened arcader
like me Adventuring for three days solid.

Of course, I have been playing Matrix on the C16, and for those who
wish to challenge me, | have attained Level 20 and scored 304,146 points
without cheating. Anyway, if you cheatin this version it puts ‘Cheat’ up
next to your score in the score table fo let everyone know how you got tt.
I've been doing quite a bit of Archon, thanx to the new Amiga version, but
I'm afraid that on the second level I still usually end up as Dragon-fodder,
My advice to Archonists ts never be without a Unicorn.

I have some excelient news for starved Marble Madness freaks, namely
a game calied Spindizzy. Forget Gyroscope, because Spindizzy blows it
clean away. You are a little inverted spinning pyramid (or a gyroscope, or
a marble, if you want to be) and you trundle around over 380-odd screens
of strange 3-B surfaces, having to contend with jumps, inclined surfaces,
trampolines, switches that turn on hidden bridges and lifts, even ice and
hostile marbles. The 3-D work is superb, with complex priorities being
flawlessly rendered, and the gameplay is challenging and very extensive: I
have spent half an hour piaying, only to be told I've only done a measly
23% of the screens Your objective is to map all the screens and collect
jewels. You can call up a large map of the area showing what you've done
and whether you've missed any jewels. You have a time limit, which you
can extend by collecting jeweis and visiting previously un-mapped screens.
Now for the bad news: this excellent game ts currentiy on the Amstrad
(I've got mine out and dusted it off). However, I expect the good news to
follow for C64 owners pretty soon now, because the Amstrad packaging has
instructions printed on it for Amstrad and C64, implying the Commie
version will be with us shortly. The game is so good that I reckon if it
were coded for the Atari System One arcade game that originally ran
Marbie Madness, itd make a worthy sequel. Me, I just hope the guy who
wrote it has got an Atari ST... (hint hint)

5: Netwize

I've just started going onto Compunet again heavily after about a month
of absence, I daren't look at my mailbox just yet, it must be full to the brim
and itll take me years to clear it! The new Partyline is running now, and is
busy most nights right up fill shutdown at 3. Most of the regulars are
there at some time, and a few real junkies who must have absolutely mega
phone bilis. The quality of the free software on the Net is high as usual,
with many Bogs tunes and some amazing demos from Bob; one of the best
is a Bob/Mach colfaboration that shows one of those sliding-puzzie things
that proceeds to solve itself revealing a pint of Guinness, after which the
message Guinness- Pure Genius is displayed in sprites underneath. It’s
areally clever demo and graphically very neat.

I've also been dabbling in Prestel and Micronet, and my first impression
was of the sheer size of the database, which is huge. You get a directory
when you join Prestei that tells you the subjects that are available. I was
gratified to see that they had a section on Peru in which there are detaiis of
holidays to Peru; there's a section on just about anything you can think of,
You can just wander the database or pick up one of the many chaflines and
see who's about; Micronet has loads of chatlines for different interests
There's a solely-64 section of Micronet too. Prestel has a mailbox facility
that's free, too, if you want private chat and don't want to pay the chatline
fee. Another thing- there are millions and millions of travel agents on
Prestel. You have been warned.

6: Events

 

The differences between Zzap and myself seem to have receded into
history, and I was asked up to Zzap Towers (actually a couple of rooms in a
place in Ludlow) to do battle with Tony Crowther, Archer Maclean, Andy
Braybrook, and a couple other programmers for a sort of Programmer's
Blast... we all played games against each other and then had a mega
Programmer's Pissup afterwards. It was good fun (I won!!), especially the
boozing. Because I won that one I haa to go back the following month to do
another one, this time against the Newsfield team, and I came second to the
accursed Rignall. Still good fun though. More boozing!

We had the Atari show in March, and just coming up we're going to the
CES electronics show in April, and of course the Commodore show in June.
We'll be taking the huge video screen to both shows, so look out for us.

The new Genesis show is now on at the Laserium in London, and as |
keep telling you, if you haven't been to the Laserium, make a point of
going, coz it’s really amazing and freaky. The new show has an excellent
‘Dance on a Volcano’ that’s done with some very useful lightning FX,

lam off to Lanzarotte this week for a week of iving on the beach, with
the all-night coding sessions I’ve been getting into recently I could do with
the rest... sun, sand and cameis, seems like an excellent scene to me!

I went to the Arcade Trade exhibition in London in January, and saw
some amazing new arcade stuff that'll have you down the arcades silingin’
in your 10p’s like there was no tomorrow... best of all is a new game from
Sega. called Space Harrier that has better-than-Amiga graphics moving at
incredible speeds... it’s a shoot’em‘up in which you control a man ina
jetpack who flies ‘into’ the screen in 3-B perspective. You have to dodge
rocks, mushrooms, all sorts of things, while blasting at some
gioriously-constructed alien creatures; there are two-headed snakes,
woolly mammoths, spaceships, robots, you narne it and you get to kill it in
Space Harrier. The graphix definitions for the game take up 1.2 megabytes
of memory! The more expensive versions of the game come in one of fhose
hydraulically -mounted simulator booths that respond to your joystick
actions, Try it- you'll LOVE it...

Went fo see Marillion, twice, since the last newsletter, and they were
excellent, especially the second time I went which was to the New Street
Odeon in Birmingham, I was right at the front. Go and see them if you get
the chance coz they are well good. I'm going to see Dio on the 7th of May,
two days before the Commodore show {I hope my ears will have stopped
ringing by then).

7:_Nybbles...

Came across an interesting device the other day, an innocuous cartridge
with a little Dutton on the back called Freezeframe (the cartridge, not the
button). It’s more or less a hacker-in-a-cartridge; you load your game, wait
until it’s running, then press the button; you then get a dump of the whole
memory-state of the computer to disk or tape. Reload this and the
program takes up exactly where you feft off when you pressed the button.
However, this unethical little device isn't perfect; the disk files it creates
refused utterly to load on my C128D internal drive; it didn’t like the turbo
loader that Freezeframe uses.

Most of the ‘true’ hackers I know (the type who perform the same
function 4 lot more ingeniously and efficiently by using their own
intelligence) scorn the new device; they reckon that there’s no subtlety to it
and indeed it does seern to generate a lot of large disk files that probably
contain a lot of useless stuff along with the program. Besides, there's a lot
of work that goes into some of the more artful hacking that you see doing
the rounds on the disk circuit. I had a lovely cracked version of Batalyx
the other day from Zeropage, they'd put a turbo loader onto it that
displayed the excellent title picture while the same was loading, and even
laid their own logo into the picture's bitmap. Very slick and a lot nicer
than just loading a bunch of Freezefrarme files!

Incidentally, I've heard that the latest versions of Final Cartridge (the
useful little cartridge I mentioned last time) has both a Game Kill and
Freezeframe option built in, along with all the rest.. if they carry on at this
rate then Final Cartridge will soon be more sophisticated than the computer
it’s designed to plug into!

My Tempest blew up again this morning, just when I'd been getting
fairly heavily into itagain. I was playing it quite happily in the morning,
theh nipped into town (where I managed to get Wind & Wuthering on CD at
last!) and returned to find it without anything on screen... the game still
functions OK, you can start a game and hear the sonix etc., but there’s just
no screen display. Ah well, it couid’ve been worse... might have been the
Stargate!ll Perhaps it's time for me to look out for a new game to replace
the Tempest, I can’t put up with the flippin’ thing blowing all the time!
Now what Id really like is a Space Harrier... but methinx I can't afford it
until I can get a second-hand one from somewhere, they mega-expensive!

After I finish doing Iridis I'm gonna look at the state of the Amiga
market; if there are any around then I'll probably put Colourspace on the
Amiga, something I've been itching to de for ages but haven't been able to
justify yet because there aren't any Amiga owners around yet to sell it to
Commodore better pull their finger out pretty quick and get the Amiga out
there fast because Atari have some pretty big guns ready to enter the
battle on the ST front... stuff like a blitter that’s better than the Amiga one
{the blitter is what allows the Amiga to do its graphix so amazingly fast),
and a sound chip called Amie that can actually put out better-quality
sound than a CD player- and all available as cheap, plug-in add-ons to the
current ST range... then there’s next vear’s ST models that could have
1024x1024-pixel displays in at least 6 bit-planes (gimme one of those to
do Colourspace on!) and 4 68026 driving it all... but some of the stuff I'm
seeing on the Amiga is so painfully good it'd be a criminal waste if the
machine didnt get out there in decent numbers. Uniess Cormmodore start
getting successful soon it looks like the home micre market will be left to
be divided between Atari and Amstrad, what with Amstrad’s surprise
takeover of Sinclair (well it certainly surprised ME). If that happens then I
know which side ['m putting my money on- Alan Sugar's good, but Uncle
Jack Tramiet’s better...

Nice to see that Atari are reviving their 7800 video game machine. This
was sceduled for release a couple years ago but got shelved; they've now
dusted it off and look like they're gonna launch it. It’s basically an $-bit
Atari computer with a decent sprite generator built in to replace the rather
limited PMG system. There's some nice software for it too, stuff like Joust
and Kevious, and the original version of Rescue on Fractalus (which was
originally designed for the 7200, so I've heard, then converted to the ‘old’
6-bit Ataris). Mind you I've always had a soft spot for video game
machines- I speak as the proud owner of an Atari VCS, Coleco, Mattel
Intellivision and Vectrex- all of which still get used! Games such as Atari
‘Superman’ and Mattel ‘Tron Deadly Disks’ may not possess much flashy
graphics or depth of gameplay, but the playability is great, Also, the
Mattel had this really zarjaz voice unit that produced excellent speech,
without freezing the game action. Unfortunately they only ever produced
three or four cartridges for the speech unit, which is a great shame because
it really added to the enjoyment of the games. Of course the only
drawback of the video game machines was the price of the cartridges-

usually £30 or £40 a shot which is far too much to expect anyone to pay
for agame. Hopefully if Atari launch the 7800 they'll keep the cartridges:
down to under £20. There’s also news of a game system to be launched. by
Nintendo that’s supposed to have arcade quality graphics and cost about
£40, but I can't fill you in with any details because I haven't seen one yet.
Apparently the folks down at Activision have one and they keep going on
about a game called Super Mario Brothers that they reckon’s really good I!
shall have to pop in and see it sometime.

I really should say ‘thanx’ to all the people who have sent me stuff
recently I get a lot of interesting letters, most of which I never get the
chance to reply to in person, and also I get some ingenious pictures and
interesting bitz. Some of them are very good, | did like the
Psychedelia-addiction’ poster I got a couple of weeks ago, if gave me a
good giggle I must say. It’s nice to see such a positive response to the work
I do, and after a while you get to look forward to the mail so you can see
what interesting stuff you'll get today. Thanx a lot.

Tony and I had an excellent time ski-ing just before Christmas, what
with the slopes all day and the pub all night (well aimost) we had a lot of
fun. Tony had never done any ski-ing before but seemed to take to it
really well, and we were all bombing down the mountain like nutcases
before the two weeks were up. One night we got so smashed we decided
it'd be a great idea to go down the piste to the next village using tea trays
and old bits of cardboard box as sledges.... the things that inebriated
programmers do, it’s disgusting! It was fun but a sure way to get a really
cold bum!

Anyway I'd better think about stopping writing now, the dawn 'll soon
be creeping in through the windows and this'll be the third night running
I've been up until 6 or 7 am doing something or other. Much to do before |
go on holiday on Thursday but at least I'll have earned my
lying-around-on-the-beach time I! could do with some further work on
the tan, too, I've got to go for it 1f I'm going to get rid of the ‘panda patches’
left by my ski goggles. I guess I'll probably see a lot of you at the
Commodore show, we'll be the ones with the giant screen and the decent
music (hopefully at excessive volumes if the organisers don't complain)
That was another nice thing about the Atari show- the only time anyone
complained about our music was when one of the people from a stand near
ours came over to complain that the music wasn't loud enough, he couldn't
hear it, and could we please turn it up please! The only time I had to turn
it down was when we had Darkside on so loud my speakers were
threatening to blow...

YAK go crash now, seeya around..

Expect to see [RIDIS aroand Jane, I hope itll be done by then... any
Coloarspace-ST owners out there. if you do any good presets, I'd like to see
them... try listening te Camel “Nade", or eny amoaat of Alen Parsons Project.
especially “Eye in the Sky’... and don't baild The Wali too hish......

 

   
   
   

The Nature of the Beast
#9

RORY? Oe
EOE RD
ESIC
SOCK RRR ID
ERROR KY
PRR OKI
SRR HR KR KIKI)
SHB IIH
SOO OOO SSO
oO SO ORD
PRR
ORR KR RO
SK KIKI IS
BOR oN IIS
SOR KHIR
ERR KKK RR KK HR HK
SSE OOD
SN I SS
RRR KR KK KR MMC
SHO IID
eceteeerececenecoctstgtnteesteees
SN MICS ooo
RR RK RI
SS OS RK ND a5
SPL I
SK RRR KK RD
SMES OR MOLD
SERRA K KK Be
PRIS RIN
SC KR
VI I
RR RS
SRR ON
‘ RRR OD
CO KI?
SR RD
ateretatateretatetereratereren SS
SKS 3
SOCK ek

SRS Se
KKK KOIOOOD
NN

Perfect Madness?

BA's imisied
fate

IRIDES ALPHA,

>
2
2,

<>
©,
a

.*,
ey

>

2
XS
SS

es
2
So
ota
SS

\
?,
e

?,
<>

2,
>

OY
>
x

ox
5
BS
<

,

%

~
<>

ae, iflaster
Comme

 

1: Go Ahead, Lose your Marbles...

Weil, at last atl the months of speculation are over. Marble Madness for the
Amiga was one of those programs that everyone had heard of, but no-one .
ever got to see, EA have been advertising its imminent release since as
long ago as PCW last year, and making great claims forat, saying that it
would exactly duplicate the arcade original, Everyone had the feeling that
when MM came out, then we'd really see the Amiga realising some if its
vast potential. Early releases for Amiga had all been OK, but I for one felt
that they weren't really pushing the machine to anywhere near the limits
of its capabilities,

So last week | got a call from London saying to go to Ariola
immediately, because MM was there ! ‘d almost given up hope of ever
seeing the game, thinking that perhaps EA had abandoned the project, so [
was pleased to hear that it really did exist; I nipped on to the train and
within two shakes of a lama’s fluffy little tail 1 was sittifig in front of the
Anioloid Amiga waiting for Madness to boot.

At last the screen cleared to reveal an option screen that looked
decidedly... er... grotty J'm afraid, just standard Amiga text, no fancy
graphics or anything! Nonetheless; I pressed on, selecting Level 0 of
difficulty, and Mouse Control (none of the trackballs we tried were
compatible). Clicked on GO! the screen went black, the drive whirred
and then the Amiga turned into a Marble Madness arcade game

The title screen may have been grotty; the game certainly is not. All
the courses are graphically identical to those of the arcade engine
Everything is there, acid.peols, hammers, ie, Marble Munchers, the silly
Wave where gravity 1s reversed, and theze evil black hallbearings that try
and knock you off the course. The sound ts in stereo, the same tunes asin
the original with perhaps not quite such a clean sound, but still millennia
away from anything you'll hear ona C64 The spot FX are excellent,
including the whizzy little sound you get when your marble gets stunned
and what must be the best sound FX in video game history when you get
on the Silly Wave you find an area where all the Marble Munchers,
Balibearings and Acid Pools have become small and helpless, and you can
roll over them with your martile to get your revenge and a 3-second time
bonus. As you do so you get these BRILLIANT squish! splurp! pfftt! sound
effects as you flatten the creeps. Control is good with the mouse, but you
mustn't move the mouse too fast or control actually reverses! A gentle
motion t¢ all that is needed usualty Holding down the left mouse button
gives you 4 faster marble.

In play, then, the game is superb, sbont 95% identical to the original
The game is not quite perfect, though, by reason of a few technical niggles
and a fairly stupid oversight.

First, the niggles. There are some priority clashes when your marble
gets close to some of the other objects, and a few colour clashes. The
scrolling can be slow if there are many objects on the screen, and if, for

playing games on) and that you must, in your dreams, assume different
personas and go adventuring in yolrown brain, réstoring your neural
linkages and eventually your sanify, along the way. You begin as a Wizard
standing by a crystal in a curious, -abstract 3-D landscape, You have to
make a ‘path trom your crystal to a goal marked.on the gare map. Along
the way. the terrain changes, and as it does, you have to change personas in
order to be able to continue building the path, Along the way you are
harassed by flying spheres and skulls which shoot out ‘rays’ that seek you
out and fry you 6n contact! For your own defence you have one of the
nicest weapons that I've ever come across in a video game: press FIRE and
you get this flashing, noisy lightning bolt that you can direct around ‘to zap
the nasties Very satisfying, and quite unbelievable if you play while
listening to the sonix on a good pair Q@ stereo ‘phones. Upon arrival at the
goal, there's a brief psychedelic tunnel that you have to fly down,
attempting to enter green portals that flash by you. When you enter one
you get a sound ef fect that sounds a lot like someone saying
‘noosh-noosh-noosh’, and then you get into the third phase of gameplay,
where you wander around a maze made up of braincells zapping creepies
by blowing them away with a laser beam reflected off a rotating sftield
Should you successfully do that bit, you get the fourth phase, where you
have to build up a jigsaw-puzzle made of psychedelic patterns a bit like a
miniature Psychedelia If you complete this cycle of four stages five tumes
(I think it's five, I've never yet made it all the way through myself) you
get the most amazing bit of music ever to grace a micro. It’s really
brilliant, with synth and almost electric-guitar sounds

On the ST {ve been sampling the delights of Joust, Star Raiders (not
quite finished and a bit easy at the moment, but stunning grafix! and
especially Time Bandits and Major Motion. Time Bandits is a huge shoot-
‘em arcade adventure, played over 16 different terrains, each of which has
16 differant levels! Some of the locations you can visit have elements of
text adventure, requiring limited manipulation of objects and Keeping a
weather eye out for clues; but mostly the game is good fast blasting, with
the higher levels requiring the reflexes of a Stargate grand master! The
graphics throughout are superb, especially the little spheres that poke their
tongues out and Louk surprised when you kill them (watch out for the guest
appearence madé by these creatures in Iridis Alpha!) There’s one bit that
really intrigues me, though, and that is this: there's this shepherd, y'see,
outside a castle in one of the locations, and he offers to sell you one of his
sheep! Naturally enough, I wanted to take him up on his offer but I
couldn't find out what it was he wanted in exchange for the woolly
organism in question. [f anyone Knows how, please let me know | want
that sheep.

‘Lhave done just a little bit of tinkering to Colourspace on the ST, too,
and now have a sort of ‘Space v1.1 that can load Neochrome files, and
possesses really deep, dense starfields and also has a ‘Vector mode’ that
produces patterns composed of lines rather than pixels. This last is rather

- neat, in that it can be adjusted from the Options menu to provide anything

3: Dream Machine Bitz

The Afniga scene is looking a lot healthier these days, some excellent
completely -finished stuff has come my way. I've already raved at length
about Marble Madness, but that’s not the only program that makes the
Amiga worth having, just one of a rapidly-growing number. I've had the
excellent Deluxe Paint for some while now, and it’s a paint program that
is just unequalled in what it can do... it works in three modes, 320x200
with 32 colours onscreen (glurk!) or 640x200 or 640x400, each with 16
colours onscreen (a bit better than Multicolour Mode on the 64, it must be
admitted). {'m no artist, but it's still tremendous fun to play around with:
itcan do anything, bending and rotating entire images, colour cycling,
really fast‘fill, etc. etc... I'm not much geod at it artistically, but Tony C. was
down here last night (there was an End-of-Iridis-Alpha all night boozeup}
and during the course of the evening cooked up this amazing piccy of an
egg-headed creature with exotic skin painting and lazer spex, and the top
of her head was opening up and there were green plants growing out
from the inside of her head... it just looked totally brilliant, but then the
Armiga decided to crash before it could get saved!!! which is a shame, ‘coz
I'm sure one or other of the Commodore mags would have published it, it
was just so far out and spacy.

On the games front, I've got Arcticiox and Skylox from EA... Arcticfox is
like a sort of superduper Battle Zone done in solid graphics (the graphics
look very much like those of a C64 game of a while back called Stellar 7, |
reckon the Amiga progey was done by the sarne crew}. The game features
some excellent sampled-sound SFE in glorious stereo, you can hear the
missiles comin’ to get you; unfortunately the speed of graphics update is
very slow, which detracts from the playability a bit. I must confess that I
didn't really get into it that much, mainly because of the slow update rate,
but there are those who reckon it’s a really good game strategically and all
that if you can put up with the slowness. Definitely shows promise, but
could have done with being a whole lot faster. The speed wasn't
significantly faster than 3D Star Strike II, which also uses shaded solid
3-D, and runs on a Spectrum!!! I suppose that once people become more
used to the Amiga the efficiency of coding will increase and so will the
speed of games.

Skyfox is really just the same as the C64 version, it’s a bit faster and a
bit neater, and the sonics are, of course, excellent, but it’s still got a definite
aura of ‘conversion’ rather than the 'made-for-Amiga’ feel of stuff like
Marble Madness and Mindwalker,

Ah yes, Mindwalker. A real gem this one. | had the pre-production
version from ages ago, which locked and sounded really good but no-one
could figure out just what was going on! Now, I have the finished game.
Coded by Synapse, it is being distributed by Commodore-Amiga, and it's
best described as a sort of psychedelic adventure! The deal is that you.re
insane (well you must be to spend £1700 on a computer and use it for

example, you just pushed a bailbearing off the edge on the Ultimate Wave,
the action of the little brush sweeping up the remains tends to slow down
the control of your marble for a little while, making matters awkwatd. The
two-player mode suffers from the same sort of delays, and slows down
quite alarmingly from time to fime. Certainly, atleast in one-player mode,
these niggles are minor, and don't really detract much irom the excellence
of the game.

Now to the oversight, which is just plain dumb, There is NO high score
table; once the Game Over tnessage has gone, there is NO way you can even
see what your last score was! It's as if someone else entirely stuck a really
crude front-end on the game, It's a pity that such a brilliant gamé is
flawed by the omission of something as trivial to program as a hi-score
table, I think fhe whole front-end could have been done a hell of a fot
better. I can't believe that the current bare option screen was produced by
the same programmer who did the rest of the game. It's better that SYSing
in to start the game up, but only just barely.

Despite my serious reservations about that front-end, I have to
conclude that MM is well cool and froody, There's the odd glitch here and
there, but it is sufficiently close to the real thing to make it utterly
addictive. The graphics draw gasps of disbelief from the owners of lesser
machines, and the satisfaction is great when you finally complete the
Ultimate Race! Even after you've completed, you can choose a harder Skill
Level and try again.

Just make sure your short-term memory's good so you can remember
your scores...

2: lridis Alpha completed

Finally I've finished it. This game has taken me the longest of any that
I've yet produced on the c64, but | think it’s worth it; it is excessively
playable, and 4 really fast blaster such as you don't often get on the C64. It
possesses the fastest scroll rate of any game I've ever seen, and there's
plenty of depth te the action, with 100 levels and their inverses to
complete, and a bonus game that's 4 pretty good game in its own right! I
really do feel that Iridis is the finest game I've produced to date.

The action takes place on a horizontally -split screen upon which there
are two opposing planet surfaces, back-to-back in the middle of the screen,
and scrolling in opposite directions. You have two ships, only one of which
is active at any given moment, During the course of the gameplay you flip
control Irom one ship to the other. You are harrassed by hordes of evil
nasty alien wrongdeers who you have to Iry whilst flying about at huge
velocities. As you kill, so you gain energy, which you must dump off at the
Planetary Core before you get too much and overload. As you kill more
creepies, so the game opens up and more destinations become available to
you at the Warp Gate. If you fill the Core totally up, then you get access to
the Bonus Game, where you must traverse a vertically scrofling course of

 

slopes, bumpers and narrow ledges. Your Control in this phase is as in
Batalyx Phase One, ie using your bullets as reaction mass, you fire in one
direction and move in the opposite one! Just to make matters truly hairy
you are pursued by flying eyeballs as well.

Should you complete the Bonus Phase you are awarded bonus points
and an extra life, and you return to the main level. Failing in the Bonus
Phase doesn't lose you a life, you just get no bonus or extra Gilby, that’s all
(Oh yeah The name of the droid is GILBY, If you don't understand why, |
suggest that you have a Flip Side session immediately |}

The action is hard and fast, with all manner of nasty ships out to get
you, and of course the inevitable camels and lamas thrown in. There are
five planets: the Sheep Planet, the Tech Planet, the Brick Planet, the
Mushroom Planet, and the Om Planet. #As you open up the game you'll be
able to warp from planet to planet at will, Each planet possesses 20 levels,
each in 2 orientations, so that’s 200 waves to do all told before you get the
(very pretty) End of Game Bonus screen and it all gets harder!

The game has a whole lot of nice touches, like the Game Completion
charts (you can call these up during the game for a graphical
representation of your progress). These screens are remembered, and can
be called up for any entry on the High Score Table so you can see how
other players have done The Pause Mode is nice too, containing MIF, a
little game called Made In France that I wrote while I was ski-ing. Well
not while [ was actually ski-ing, but after I'd been to the bar in the
evenings, if you see what I mean. MIF itself contains another demo called
DNA that’s rather nity, as 1s the display you get if you do all 200 levels,
But none of you are going to cee that one for a few months yet- unless you
find the Cheat Mode! The Title Screen contains a Fractal Music demo, too |
love Fractals, and this is the first time I've ever tried applying them to
music. The results are interesting .. not tunes as such, more like a
never-ending bit that sounds hke the music in a film when it gets to the
tense bit. Weird

Iridis can't be Freezeframed either. There's a way to defeat those
cartridges that I mentioned in the last screed Nor can it be Game Killed

In play, Iridis 1s one of the most exhilarating blasts I've yet had. The
soms are loud and the game moves very fast, but you'll find that you still
have to use your brains! My best score so far without the Cheat Mode 1s
136,000 odd, and I opened up 9 out of the 10 available Surfaces

Iridis is being released in collaboration with Hewsons this time
Another experiment like the Ariola deal. And they did do rather well in
promoting Uridium, so | dont see why they shouldn't do just as well for
my Iridis

Of course, working with Hewsons meant lots of hassle like working to
deadlines, and having them come around all the time and poke their
noses into my game design, and hassle me for lots of stuff, but ] think itll
be worth it in the end! Indis i released on 27 Aug, I'll be showing it at
PCW too, so if you want to see it lirst come along and take a look!

from long-persistance sinuous designs that flow and change all over the
screen, down to a tight line-trace that looks a lot like the scanning laser
effects used at the Laserium. Eventually I intend to expand Colourspace a
lot more, adding stuff like Midi interfacing and animation and various
other hoopy bits whilst still retaining all the original functions, This «will
need the 1-megabyte RAM on the STs, I have just had my own rig /
expanded to a megabyte to make room for the new stuff. J also got a really
neat little 3.5in drive from AST. it’s tiny, much smaller than the Atari
originals, and it’s double sided too so it holds twice as much data

Winter Games on the ST 1s well good, too; pretty grafix and not a bit of
flicker, the scrolling’s all well and groovy too, no glitches, and pretty cool
for a machine that doesn’t have any hardware smooth-scroll

The games scene on both the megamachines is looking healthier now,
with the ST having lots of good games out now, and the Amiga having
slightly less stuff, but with one or two absolutely blindingly amazing
games.

4: Happenings

In between working on Iridis, I've been doing the usual sort of stuff going
down the Clocktower for some decent ale and loud rock music, going to the
odd gig, and going on Cnet far too much (though not as much as the high
season of Cnet last Summer, where we were all on till 3am every day,
without fail!)...

I knocked up a couple of really cool Cnet demos in between bits of
Iridis, which you should try and pick up, since they are rather unusual
the firs {, DNA, draws a large rotating double helix on the screen, using the
keyboard you can alter the shape of the helix, changing its phase and
frequency and adding a second waveform to the first and changing the
colours of the strands and so forth. Each strand of the DNA (there are two)
1s composed of 24 sprites, and there's a 48-sprite star field behind the lot,
so that’s a fair whack of sprites flyin’ around the Commie screen! This
demo is also available inside Iridis-Alpha, you just press the * key while
you're in the Pause mode

The other demo I have done recently is a sort of ‘son-of-DNA’ called
TAURUS.:TORUS, and it brings together a couple of routines that I put
together for Iridis. The graphic display 1s of a rotating ring made up of
sprites; the motion of the ring is controlled by four sinusoidal oscillators
(each of which can be set from the keyboard). These oscillators in turn
provide the generator for a fractal-sound routine running behind
everything. Thus, as you alter the shape of the torus by adjusting the
oscillators, you simultaneously alter the structure of the musical fractal
being played. Well weird (and a little discordant at high pitches I'm afraid,
‘coz I forgot to make the note tables long enough). I can really get into
these oscillator-based demos. there’s a lot of stuff in there that I'll be
using in Colourspace I] methinx!!

Catting atimr fram nra man Aacte T rrant + Rfavette
geting away from progr amming for a moment, I went. to se Marillion

and Jethro Tull, amongst others, at the Milton Keynes Bowl the other
weekend, and they were truly brilliant... at least I thought so after
ingesting large amounts of beer! It helped that it was a brilliant sunny
day, quite unlike the time I went to Knebworth to see Deep Purple last
year when it chucked it down!

Whilst still on the subject of music, hear that there is shortly to be a
Sigue Sigue Spodnik game coming out! (Well, perhaps not exactly music
then}. I for one am not exactly thrilled at the prospect of a game linked to
this largely uninspiring group who seem to be trying to work the old Sex
Pistols ‘Rock & Roll Swindle’ scam all over again; but the game may bear
some looking at nonetheless since I know the bloke who's doing it and he
doesn't usually Knock out duff code. My advice is to have a look at the
game despite it’s aS@Gociations. The funny thing is, when I asked the
chap behind the program how much SSS were paying him to do a game for
them, he laughed and replied that he was paying them for the privilege!
Weird......

5: Down the Arcades

There's some interesting new stuff happening in the arcades just now. I
was lucky enough to go to an Open Day at Deith Leisure the other day
(Deith are one of the largest arcade suppliers in the country, and the source
of my Stargate and Star Wars machines) where I saw quite a few new
machines. The Open Day was great, yon walked in to a large room full of
the very latest video games and pinball tables, all on free play mode, and
there was free beer too!

One of the most impressive new games was the new Konami blaster
calied Salamander. This is a lot like Nemesis, except that there are more
stages and that two players can battle it out simultaneously! The graphics
are brilliant, with pulsating brains, tentacles covered in sere that poke out
and probe around for the players’ ships, and an excellent sequence where
you fly through a tunnel of flame (a bit like Sheep in Space would look if
both planet surfaces decided to simultaneously and spontaneously erupt
into flame) from which great, looping solar flares leap forth and {unless
you're careful) fry your ship. The game is easy to get into, with lots of
extra weaponry (multiples and ripple lasers etc) being easy to get right at
the start of the game. This game has zillions of sprites on screen at the
same time, it’s quite unbelievable at times... although when the going gets
really heavy it does slow down a bit. Even so, an excellent blaster for the
blood-and-thunder brigade.

The other major release was Road Runner, an Atari System One game
that's based on the cartoon series. You guide RR. around eating up bird
seed and attempting to lure Wile E. Coyote to an unpleasant demise. The -
game has very good cartoon-like graphics, and provides a pleasant
diversion in between the hectic intense bouts of playing Salamander.

There's also a sequel to Hang-On, the Sega motorbile variant of PolePos.
The sequel's called Enduro and has a large, sit-upon replica’of an Enduro
bike that you have to wheelie at appropriate moments to make jumps on
the course. The track has hills, too; the road goes up and down, something
I've not seen in any racing game yet. (except Revs).

6: Various...

Now that I"ve finished 1A, I’m off on hols for a couple of weeks and then
I"m gonna come back and do aC 16 game, nice and quickly so I've got most,
of it done for PCW. I want to make those 121) colors really work in a game
It's not been done yet and I intend to put that to rights...

After that, I'm torn between getting down to another C64 gamé, or
maybe doing something more for the Atari ST, either a game or the
extended version of Colourspace I mentioned earlier. Of course what I'd
really like is to do Colourspace on the Amiga, ‘coz I'am sure I could doa
really mega version on that machine! Trouble is, there are so few Amigas
in the WE that, unless I was assured of ‘Stateside distribution of the
finished program as well as UK sales, it wouldn't be cofamercially viable. |
hate having to leave the Amiga alone for purely commercial reasons, but |
have to eat and earn sotne bread somehow, and at the moment there aren't
enough Amigas in the UE to allow me te work on Amiga stuff and make
any money. I have heard rumours about the possibility of a cut-down
Amiga variant being released, same graphics chips etc, but in a keyhoard
case more like the Atari ST, rather than the large and expensive PC-type
box it comes in at present., If such a machine were released in the £500-
£700 range, it would be excellent; the Amuga affordable at last! Put the
Amiga in a cheaper package, make it available to people who want to move
on irom their C64s at not too prohibitive a price, and Commodore's troubles
would be over, I reckon. I hope it turns out to be more than a rumour, I
Teally do. If it comes out Mit have a party.
~ Right now I'm off to Corfu with the Tadiey Mafia tomorrow morning. I
am completely knackered, what with finishing Iridis bane on me deadline
and last night's Programmers Pissup to celebrate the completion of Lridis
(there was me, the Mafia, Tony C, Andy Braybrook and ex-Taskset

' programmer Gibbo down here, & we didn't crash till 7 am)...

I will see ya at PCW if you're coming along, we'll have Colourspace
demos running continuously on the big screen, and Iridis Alpha and 3
demo of Voidrynner (Grid 111} on the C 16 too, 30 it should be a good show.
PCW is always good fun, And then in October I’m off to Peru again in order
to do a bit more llama-spotting....,

 

That's all for the moment... be sare and be at PCW and try Iridiz-Aipha...
saggested muzic to listen to: Sky. Dokken. lots and lots of Talking Heads (that
Dave Byrne is SO weird!)... play Space Harrier in the arcades. try Green Beret on
the C64, and Spindizzy too, that’s well good... get Iridis Alpha and have yourself
a BLAST! Gilby sex GO GIVE "EM BRELL!!#

 

 

NATURE OF THE BEAHT....
NUMBER TEP

- COLOURSPACE II... work in progress

- IRIDIS ALPHA tips and strategies

- VOID RUNNER on C16

- and the next 64 project... the Beasts are Back!!!

1: Iridis and Other Hoopy Stuff

After a lot of work Iridis was finally finished around the middle of
August, and is doing fairly well | think. At least I've seen it around in
Boots and places so it’s getting out there. 1 was pretty pleased with Iridis,
it satisfied the need I have long had to write the meanest fastest hardest
and noisi*st blast I could on the C64. So far I've heard of no-one
completing it, I'd like to know if anyone manages it... my best game had me
completing about 70% of the levels, but some of those higher Mushroom
and Om planet levels are a trifle mean

We must apologise to some of the earliest purchasers of IA, as well... it
seems that some data was corrupted during the production phase of the
data duplication, and the first few hundred copies of the game used to bug
out if you lost at the Bonus Phase All the buggy copies known of have
been replaced, and all current tapes are fine, but if you find you have a
buggy version you should send it back to those awfully nice Hewsons
people and they ll give you an unglitchified one,

The instructions turned out a bit skimpy, too, ‘coz some of my original
draft got nobbied ‘twixt Atari printout and instruction leaflet. Consequently
there was no mention of the Bonus phase, or of access to the demo game or
DNA-display Basically, what was said was as follows
BONUS LEVEL When the player has completely filled the Core with
energy, the Bonus Round begins. In the Bonus Ronnd the player controls a
reaction mass-driven Gilby over a vertically -scrolling obstacle course of
ramps, bumpers and narrow passages. A bit like a pinball table, really,
‘cept there are no flippers and YOU are the ball Gilby fires Lullets when
you push the Joystick in auy direction, and thanks to Newton Gilhy moves
in the opporite direction. Very much like Phase One ia Batalyx. Your
objective is to traverse the scrolling playfie'4 by going up the seen as far
as you can, until you find the goal. You have eight lives to do this, and you
do not lose a life by bouncing off the walls of the course

This is where the black pulsating eyeballs come in. Specifically, they
come in in order to arcle around you and tempt to collide with you,
relieving you of one life for each vollision, and knocking you off course,
which 1s especially annoying when you have just achieved a state of
blissful stasis on that really nasty narrow ledge vii Level Five that always
takes five minutes of frenzied attempts to get static on prior to going up
that poky little pass-ce to the goal and Level Six. Luckily, if you shoot the
chain of eyeballs with your bullets, they go hte and freaked out for a ittle
while and run away uni they get straight again, at which time they charge
back to resume their frenzied gyrations You shoot them, and use the
freakedout-time to negotiate tricky bits of course.

Should you reach the end of the course with lives in hand, you are
awarded a bonus Gilby and some zarjaz points, and transferred back to the
main game. If you lose the Bonus Phase, you return to the bonus gam
with no loss of life, but with sorry, no bonus,

A hint for getting used to the Bonus Phase: the first course can be run at

maximum speed by just goi
up as fast as you can,
PAUSE MODL. is acuvated by pressing f1. This will dump you into MIF, a
little pause-game in which your objective is to knock the trail of pixels into
the pulsating blob on the screen. You do this by using the keys N and M.
Pressing the N key puts a little / defle.tur in the path of the pixels;
pressing M leaves a \. The trail of pixels bounces off this as it would off a
mirror. Additionally, each time a reflector is bounced-off, it inverts its
state, ie. / becomes \, and vice versa. The more deflectors you use, the
harder it becomes to get a clesr shot at the pulsating blob. You must hit
the blob before the timer bar (at the right of the screen) hits 7-ro. The
faster you hit the blob, the more points you get. Pots are shown by the
bar at the boticun of the screen; a blip above that bar represents the
hi-score. There are four speeds of play, selectable during play by pressing
the space bar. You can get additional bonus points this way, because the
faster the game speed is at the time the Livbby thing is hit, the more points
you get. If you fail to hit the pulsating blobby thing before the timer runs
out, the score is reset and the game restarts. A fun game of bounces, bars,
bonuses, blips, blobby things and other stuff beginning with B.

You can leave the pause mode by pressing {1 again, or you can press
star, which will take you into DNA, my psychedelic sprite-chain demo that
I wrote for Cnet a while back. Iu DNA you cau alter the waveforms, change
the cvlours and speed of the strands, put on some Pink Floyd, turn uit the
lights, freak and groove gene. ally, and have a relaxing and rather
wonderful time before pressing sta: apain to return to MIF, where you can
press f1 if you want to resume the mayhem-at-hand in the real game. (But
what is the Real Game? Iridis or MIF? DNA even? Life? Is Life the Real
Game or are we all just in some gigantic Pause Mode for a richer, more
wonderful Real Reality someplace, and should we all be worried about the
Time of the Coming of the Finger that will press the Great F1 Key of the
Universe so that God can resume what he was really doing in the first
place?

As for general gameplay hints for IA, first I shall deal with the problem
of Licker Ships. On the Level Three Lickeio, never shoot the Phreds from
close range. Fly along the screen, turn and fire, then fly on again. You see,
when a Phred is shot, a Licker appears. The Licker cannot be shot, but
uniess it makes contact with you within half a second of its genesis, it will
expire. Ifa Licker does hit you, it will hang on. You have then to shake it
loose and stay clear of it for half a second, after which it will head for
the Great Ice Lolly in the Sky, theie to lick for eternity, or until God runs
out of sprites. To shake off a Licker, do just that; shake the stick in every
conceivable direction, distort your face into a grimace of feral hatred, and
snarl and curse furiously.

Lickers will pop up regularly throughout the game, and you should use
avoidance tactics at all times. Above ail, never be standing around on the
Core when there are Lickers about. They cling on to you and hinder your
efforts to take off, and usually they'll drag you down before you manage it.

f th Al #1 + ‘
of the screen and flying straizht

Van malt aton ansauntar nrnac urhara na Tesoof,
10U Wi aS Sncounver Waves where ho iraiisier Rings bi VECOMe

available during blasting, and you cannot Transfe. to appease an
ugly-looking Entropy Gauge. The trick is to hang around the Warp Gate
and go in when th: Entropy looks bad. A warp resets the Entropy, and it’s
far better to have a live Gilby on the wrong planet, than a dead one on the
right planet...

Fly as fast as you comfortably can most of the time, as this will give you
a high Bonus Multiplier value. Go for a methodical progress through the
early waves of each set, opening up the nevt set of Icons on the Status
Chart as soon as you can. This gives you a wider choice of Waip Gate
destinations that you cau use when you find yourself on a particularly
diffy wave. Fill the Core and visit the Bonus Phase whenever you've just
lost a Gilby, as a good Bonus Phase run will earn you an extra. If you find
the BP difficult, don't go in unt you really need to: if you save the easy
Bonus runs for when the going gets tough planetside, you'll be grateful for
the easy extra Gilbies. Also, don't vo in the Bonus Phase if you already
have four Gilbies (you cannot accrue more than four) uniess you've got the
Phase so totally wired that you can afford to go in there just for the points.

Use trees (or equivalent ground features on other planets) as
mini-Cores. You can land and take off from the little bit of Core platform
that lies at the base. Position Gilby a little to the left or right of centre over
the tree, and land as usual. Conversely, the various planet features sticking
up in the Core zone can be used for emergency takeoffs without having to
walk off the Core. Just stroll up to a planet feature, and when you're about
central over it, jump up. If you timed it right your jets will cut in and
you'll be flying. This last manoeuvre is particularly useful if you are down
on the Core and being hassled by Lickers.

Right, that's quite enougi. Iridis Alpha for the moment, let me tell you
what I did next.

2: What Yak Did Next

was to take to the C16 and produce a game called Voidrunnei. This is
basically a sequel to the Gridrunner /Matrix sequence, and is played in a
similar manner; i.e. various creepies hurtie towards you at improbable
velocities, and you do your best to splatter their atoms before they splatter
yours. VR is not so risidly structured as the earlier Grid e>mes were, in
that you possess not one, but four ships, which appear in different
formations each wave; and the aliens come at you from ail sides, not only
from the top of the screen downwards. The whole is pretty colourful, ‘coz
getting a lot of colours on the C16 is pretty easy, which makes me wonder
why hardly any ©16 games on the market use wore than about eight of
them. Weird,

Anyway, the game is an all-out blasier very much in the style of the old
Vic-20 blasters that I used to knock ont back in “82 and ‘83, and it was a
lot of fun to sit down and write a nice quick blast instead of having to
worry about filling up memory with a load of fancy tunes and graphics. It

chanid ha caming aut fram Arialocaft urbanarar thar finalir + mw"
SHOWUG De COMME OULITOM AMOiasoie woenever wie} iinduy eeu around to

releasing it; they haven't yet, and I finished it before I went to Peru, so I
hope they pull their finger out. Any C16 people out there into speed and
heavy metal blasting should give it a look.

Immediately after finishing Voidrunner I nipped off to South America,
there to visit Colombia, Bolivia, Brazil, and mainly Peru. Like last time, I
had an amazing time, meeting some interesting people and some rather
beautiful beasties. I played Stargate in Cuzco, Space Invaders Part Two in
Iguass, Nemesis in La Paz, Pole Position II in Lima, and Star Wars in Rio
de Janeiro... not that I spent all of my time in the arcades: a lot of it was
spent trekking around the Inca ruins, relating to llamas, getting to grips
with them and taking no end of photos of them. It always annoys me
when people slag off liamas as being bad-tempered creatures. All the ones
I met in Peru were perfectly friendly; I didn't get spat at at all. Mind you,
maybe they can recognise the type of human (like me) who has a profound
empathy with them. Maybe I was a llama in my last incarnation. That
would explain a lot of my weirdness...

Mind you, llamas are pretty exceptional creatures. I'm not the only one
impressed by them. Michael Jackson is famous for having a pet Iaiue (or
was he famous for something else? didn't he sing or something?}; Steve
Wozniak, the designer of the Apple II, lives, according to BYTE magazine,
on a ranch in the California mountains, with a whole herd of the beasties;
and in a recent interview with Ken Kesey, one of the original acid gurus of
the 60s, he says that llamas give off a completely different kind of aura
than any other type of animal that he has encountered. (I agree with him,
but I'd add that camels have the same type of aura too, definitely
something slightly... well... alien).

Anyway, ‘nuff said aboul llamas. On me hols I did all the same things
that. I had done last time I went, and then some, ‘coz the tour was
extended, covering more than just Peru. Machu Picchu was still amazing,
magical and mystical; the Inca ruins just as perplexing. In Brazil we visited
waterfalls three kilometers wide; saw the largest hydroelectric dam in the
world; and swam and sunbathed on possibly the most famous beach ever,
Copacabana Beach in Rio. In Bolivia I found that you can get even better
llama jumpers than in Peru; the jumpers are actually shaggy, and the
shaggiest of the ones I bought looks more like a skin than a jumper. Also
in Bolivia, in La Paz, all the arcades I went into, had armed police in them.
Gives you a weird feeling to be playing Commando and turn around to see
the real thing looking back at you. Creepy. I'm glad we don’t get
machine-pistol-toting coppers in the Crystal Rooms on Leicester Square!
In Peru, fifty miles by boat up the Amazon from Iquitos, we stayed at the
Explorama Jungle Lodge, which is really just a givup of wooden huts on
stilts, and where the loo is a hole in the ground with a seat over it and
tarantula webs in the corners, Amazing place, real deep Tarzan-style
jungle, local Indians who still use blowpipes for hunting.

It’s also pretty tass to think that somewhere in the Amazon jumgle there is
an Indian going around in an Iridis Alpha t-shirt, ‘coz I traded one for a
blowpipe and darts while I was there! The Indian- only dress in their
traditional gear for the tourists; we saw them out in thew canoes on the
river, and they ail wear jeans and T-shirts, mostly American ones they've
got off the tourists.

Upon return from these exotic parts, I got down to the serious business
of deciding what to do next. First off, I fired up the ST with a view to
extending Colourspace. I should be linking 1p with a musician next year to
do some good stuff involving Colourspace, and I'd long felt the urge to
extend the original concept, so this is the perfect opportunity: I'll have lots
of new FX to use in my project, and Colourspace II to release at the end of
it. So far, | have added to Colourspace 1 the capability to map the screen
onto a variety of surfaces; for example, you can project a cube with
Colourspace running on all three visible faces, or a series of concentric
spheres with ‘Space on the surfaces. This looks weil good when you run a
horizontal starfield over tei, ‘coz you get a series of gently-rotating
starglobes that just look amazing. You can get Neo or Degas pix and remap
them onto these surfaces, which looks really great (the stuff on the front
cover was done that way). The extension of ‘Space is going to continue
over the next few months; at the end of it I hope to have animation stuff
built-in, keyboard macros (which will allow you to pre-program any key
with a specific event or series of events), nicer meiius, with text rather
than awkward unlabelled parameter representations, and the possibility of
driving the thing by other controllers than just the mouse (a graphics
tablet, for example). Plus, generally tidy the thing up and add anything
hice that pops into my head. There's nu hurry, ‘Space 1 is still strong, so I
probably won't release anything till Summer or so, but the work is in hand
and proceeding smoothly.

Of course, I can’t go spending all this time on the ST, much as I love the
beastie, without doing something for the good ol' 64. With this in mind I
have already started work on my next 64 game...

3: The Beasts are Back!

Get ready for... Revenge II! (I probably won't cali it that ir the end,
smacks too much of film sequels and ali that joss). It all started as I sat
playing Chopiiter on my new Sega video game (of which more later)...
there was a rather zarjaz ground scroll routine the like of which I'd often
thought of doing myself but never got around to. So one night I fell to and
made a similar routine for the Comic, then I had the idea that I'd like to
see a camel walking along that uice scrolling ground, so I chucked in the
old Revenge sprites, then decided that I could really improve that old
camel animation if I wanted to, and before I knew it I was writing Revenge
Il. The game is going to be an extension /improvement of the original idea,
with better gameplay and graphix, and more depth than the original. I'm
really enjoying returning to the Camels theme again, I've missed those 90

foot high laser-spitting neutronium-shielded beasties. The new camel! will
be able to fly and drop little black bombs (with BOMB written on them in
tiny letters) and do lots more stuff than its Mark 1 ancesto1s. And I pian
to write a much smarter ACON/ routine than I've ever used in any other
game, and also scroll lots more stuff on quite a few different levels. I shall
Have Fun, and hopefully so will you when I've finished (which I hope will
be March or so next year).

4: The SEGA and the 7800

At the PCW show, Ariolasoft gave me a rather nice pressie in the form
of one of the only SEGA game consoles in the UK at that time. I have had it
some time now, and from experience | can tell you: it’s great. Mine lives on
top of my Commodore monitor (it even Las a
Commodore-monitor -cable-compatible hole in the back!) and gets fired up
when the assemblies start to take too long on the ol' 128. The games come
in two forms, with 32K games on Astron cards and 128K games on proper
cartridges. The display is excellent, the sonics OK, and the gameplay
superb. The joysticks are tiny and take a bit of getting used to, but they
seem well-made and mine show no signs of distress after a couple of
months use, and are really pretty good when you get used to them. They
have two independant fire buttons, with the least important function in
any given game being delegated to Button Two. You can get away with
playing most games with a single button joystick if you really want to (the
joystick ports are standard types so you can use your Kempston Pro or
whatever).

The games I've liked best so far are: Hang-On, an Astron-card version
of the arcade bike racing game, very smooth and playable; Astro
Warrior, a vertically-scrolling blaster in the Star Force/Salamander
/Nemesis/Uridium mould, with lovely graphix; Black Belt, a fast beat'em
up where your opponents break up into littie sprites and fly apart whem
you kick them (just like in the Bruce Lee films) and where I have yet to get
past the large Sumo wrestler at the end of Level Three who has a
psychopathic tendency to jurup up and down on your head. Choplifter is
great, exactly like the Arcade version with thres levels (the last one, in the
caves, is WELL hard) and zarjaz scrolling ground just like on Revenge II
(hehe). Best of the lot, and worth the asking price of the Sega on its own, is
Fantasy Zone, which defies description. It’s a fast-paced shoot-‘em up
played against seven levels of amaaaaazing freaky psychedelic scrolling
backgrounds, during which you get attacked by large blocks of wood
(spitting peas at you); enraged conical flasks; huge silly-looking fish with
ballistic teeth; an Inca sun (with lasers); snow-penguins; a grenade-lobbing
turtle, and an angry blockhead which keeps on breaking apart and
attempting to re-form itself on your noggin, Plus loads and LOADS of other
enemies with names like Moo-cotons and C-souls (well, it IS Japanese}! The
music is great and... well.. weird, and if you do all seven levels, you have to
confront all the large enemies over again before the Final Showdown with a

large alien which sends tentacles with heads on them shooting out to get
you. I've not got past that bit yet but I will.. Along the way you pick up
coins obtained by blasting the nasties, and you can occasionally go into a
Shop and buy goodies like laser beams, Sinart bombs, seven-way shots (a
really great option that, you can massacre everything in sight), firebombs
(very useful for destroying enemy bases on the ground in the freaky blue
fourth level}, and even an extra ship. Of course, the more you buy of any
given item, the more the price goes up (especially of the Extra Ships!). The
game is just a joy to play; even though I'm pretty good at it now and can go
Eighth Level most games, I still enjoy working my way up through the
easier levels. It’s just brilliant, and deserves a cult following. Bags me first
member of the cult.

The Sega is pretty amazing for its price, around £100 I think; the games
you'll play are far in advance of anything you're going to see arcade-wise
on the C64. The only slight niggle is that there tends to be a bit of
spriteflicker when you get a lot of sprites on one rasle: line, but that
doesn't detract from the excelleive of the games. Especially Fantasy zone. I
think Fantasy Zone is possibly the best shoot-'em-up | have ever played on
a home system. It’s tass. It's got style Not only that, but I hear that
Space Harrier is coming oul for the Sega next year, with a 2 Megabyte ROM
cartridge containing all the graphic data from the original game...

Another system that I've seen but do not yet possess (although I have
hopes of remedying that situation when I go visit Atari on Wednesday) is
the Atari 7600, which I got a good look at at the Atari show fast weekend.
This beastie is based on the MARIE chip, Atari's successor to ANTIC, and
looks pretty good judging by the stuff I saw. There was a neat version of
Robotron, missing the blow-apart explosions, but very fast and blastable,
and no flicker anywhere; a superb Xevious, as close to the arcade version
as you'll get without buying an arcade game; Food Fight, a little-known but
nonetheless tass Atari arcade game that has converted exactly to the 7800;
Pole Pos II, a fine version of the classic race game; and Centipede, more oi
less perfect conversion. Those are the ones I saw, and I know that
Asteroids, Joust, and improved versions of Fractalus and Ballblazer have
been written for the system but I ain't seen them yet. Pius, the 7800 will
run all yer old VCS stuff, which is fine if, like me, you still enjoy some of
those old classics despite the Viocky graphix, and can't be both-red to drag
out the old VCS. {I still reckon VCS Superman is a fine game). The unit
itself is sleek and spacy, and cheaper than the Sega too, price arovnd £70
or so but Atari haven't confirmed that yet.

Beyond those two, the only remaining game console coming out és the
Nintendo, supposedly the most powerful of the lot and also the most
expensive, at £150. I haven't seen this yet, but I'm told that it runs a
near-perfect version of Nemesis, in which I shall be very interested.
(Salamander too, please guys).

Atari are providing me with a devkit for the 7800, so I should be able
to put some nice stuff on that system, and if Ariola come through with
some kit for the Sega I'll go for that too.

5: Shows an’ stuff

I've just had a heavy couple of weeks, with the Commie show followed
immediately by the Atari show... the CBM show was OK, but not as
interesting as shows of old methinks, hardly any software houses there,
just retailers selling cheap software. The Big C were there with the Amiga,
now reduced in price but still beyond the reach of mere humans. J was
hoping to get a copy of Sanctuary, a new Firebird game that warms my
heart with its weirdness, but it’s not released yet. Of course I met all me
old Show mates and had the traditional Saturday night Laserium trip and
boozeups and so on, and we had Sega sessions in my hotel room and all
that sort of joss, so I had a good time. Tony C showed me a Marble
Madness he's writing and which beats the p*ss out of the EA version, and
his new blaster Moebius, which is sort of like a cross between Defender and
Sheep in Space. I met Paul Shirley who told me he'd started a version of
Spindizzy on the Atari ST, but shelved it for tie moment; please hurry up
and un-shelve it, ] wanna see that game on my ST!

The following weekend was the Atari show, which was more interesting
with lots of things happening for the ST. I got an ace Sound Sampler for
the ST, and a graphics tablet for use with Colourspace, and Flight Sim II
which is brilliant on the ST... I was there with the Barco projection system,
doing Colourspace shows every couple of hours, demonstrating Colourspace
version 1.3 with the spherical and cubic mapping options. There were
more boozeups and Laserium trips and suchlike and I'm now knackered!
There's plenty new games appearing for the ST, good stuff like Karate Kid
IL, a fine beat-'em-up with tass graphix and a weird sequence where you
have to catch a fly with a pair of chopsticks! Plus Atari were there with
STs and the 7800, and demonstrating the new Blitter which is coming out
soon for the ST.

6: Blasting...

I've been getting into a good spot of zapping just recently, what with
the Sega and all the new ST stuff and so on. I also have a Mach III arcade
game which is just amazing. It’s best if you stand in a dark room with
some good heavy jet-fighter-music on the stereo and blast away as you
scream through the groovy laser-disk scenery at warp factor 10.

Of the ST stuff, best blast since Time Bandit is definitely Jez San’s
Starglider, a brilliant fast vector-graphic 3D blaster along the lines of the
Star Wars/Empire Strikes Back arcade games. The controls take a little
while to master but it’s worth the effort. One of the best effects is the
Missile; when you launch a Missile a separate screen drops down over the
play area and you get a missile’s eye view of the flight toward the target;
you can steer the missile towards its target. Very satisfying. Eighteen
months in deyclopment but well worth the wait. Should be out for the
Amiga soon, with solid graphics, which should be most interesting.

Also on the ST is Flight Sim I]. I had this on me Cominie but hardly

ever used to play it ‘coz it was so S-L-O-W. On the ST it's very respectable
in speed, doing solid 3D stuff at a fair clip, and you get an impressive array
of options, such as the ability to look out your plane in any direction, even
to see your plane from a spotter-aircraft following you or from the control
tower. You can have multiple windows open with a different view in each.
I'm not generally into flight sims but I love this one, ‘coz it’s actually very
playable.

On the Commie there hasn't been that much in the way of blasters just
recently, I've been keeping myself occupied playing my own Iridis Alpha
when I[ feel like a bit of heavy metal blasting... beyond that I will
occasionally go for a spot of Druid or perhaps a little Thrust, but what I'm
really waiting to gel hold of is that Sentinel game, which looks extremely
weird (so I'm very likely to enjoy it). I've even been digging out Revenge
from time to time. (Which reminds me: flicking through the Xmas Zzap |
was pleased to notice my AMC character set being used in a game called
Nuclear Embargo- which must bring the total of games using that
excellent character set to at least thirty. It still amazes me that
prograniuuers can't be fagged to do their owu char sets. Oh well, at least I
can safely claim to having tie Most Popular Alternate Character Set on the
Commodore 64....).

I've been heavity involved in MSX Nemesis, too. At first sight this game
looks awful, because the MSX cannot smooth scroll at all, and this program
does nothing to hide that shameful fact, and everything lollops along at 4
chunk-rez clip. If you ignore the scrolling, though, what you've got is an
excellent game of Nemesis. The Japs have coaxed more sprites out of the
MSX than I've ever seen before, and the graphix, although jerky, are very
detailed thanks to the game being on a whoppine 128K of ROM.

The MSX has also had me in thrall with a pinball game called Roller Ball.
This is a scrolling-style pinball game along the lines of Slambaill, the
Synapse one produced for the Commie a few years back now, RB has four
sections of table, and the scroll is OK, surprisingly enough for an MSX. The
best thing about the game is the playability- it is superb. When the
Todd-creature (an Earthbeing of my aquaintance who has displayed an
affinity for Pinball in real life} was exposed to Roller Ball he played for
about four hours solid. The Japs definitely know all about playability in
their games (witness just about any Konami MSX title, or the Sega stuff for
example)...

Of course, now I’m waiting to see what has become of Gauntlet and
Space Harrier at the hands of US Gold. Gauntlet on the C64 should t OK as
the machine's quite well suited to the game; Space Harrier I’m not so sure
about, ‘coz the only way I can see the programmer getting the necessary
speed and FX out of the screen would be to have huge character rez chunks
of stuff flying out the screen so fast that you'd have little ume to register
the fact that they are in fact character-rez and not sprites. Hmm. It
remains to be seen, but I'm thinking of that 2 Megabyte cart coming out for
the Sega console and wondering if a 64k conversion shoehorned into a
Commie could successfully represeut the same game...

GCanmttat ie alton camineg ont for tha ST urich chara ha rt rat arueatic
VOUUUISL 1S Glo LVM VUE EVE LUG 2, Wilko SHOU De "Vy exceuen

The Atari Systein Gne arcade system is 68000-based so there's no reason
why most of the games should not be feasible on the good old ST There is
little doubt in my mind that the ST is the next great games micro. It’s
cheap (and getting cheap-r® accessible, well-supported in both hardware
and software, reliable (or at least my own ST has been} and very powerful.
Atari themselves have expressed a commitment to the games market, and
they're planning to have all their arcade titles available on disk and ROM
I'm looking forward fo beginning my first blaster for the ST, which I shall
begin coding as soon as I finish Revenge II on the ‘64.

The Amiga, I'm afraid, doesn't excite me as much as it used to. It’s still
inaccessible, even with the £500 price drop; and not much is happening for
it at the moment, at last in the UK. Although it’s a more powerful system
than the ST, mine sits down the end of my room gathering dust most of the
time (except for when I fancy games of MM or Mindwalker), and it’s not
really on to have all that system being used for two games, no matter how
excellent. The ST, on the other tiand, is in more or less constant use: it's
been expanded to 1 Megabyte, and now has a sound sampler, graphics
tablet, and 20 Meg hard drive added, it gets used for games,
wordprocessing, and of course dev work for Colourspace. It'll also serve as
the dev system for the 7600, and I hope to get 6502 cross-assembler so |
can do all my ‘64 assernblies on the ST too, and download to the
Commodore, For me, the worth of a system is measured by how much you
use it, not how powerful it is technically, and by this measure my ST is
worth a fot more to me than the Aunuga. Maybe things will change when
the B-52 cheap Amiga comes out next year... but by then the ST will be
cheaper, too. And more powerful, Atari don’t stand still!

Better amend this now... I just went up to London and got myself a copy
of Sentinel at last, and I've been playing it quite a bit. [t's good, but it gets
very difficnli very fast. In fast night's session (I played untii 4 am) I got
trom level zero to level eight, no sweat, then from eight to 22... and there
Vm stuck, Very frustrating indeed: there are two Sertries as well as the
Sentinel, and by the time you've worked your way up out of the hole you
start in you're under full scan from both Sentries and no energy left to
build any towers, and it’s goodbye Robot. I hope I can evolve a strategy
soon, or I'll pass the frustration-threshold and get pee'd off with the whole
thing, which would be a shame, ‘coz the game is interesting. [t would've
been nice to have a couple of Shields or something to at least allow you to
get a good start into a level before you cop it

Well, I better stop here, I have to go to Atari this fternoon t’pick up
some goodies. Keep on blastin’...

PPP III lt ol al Cat PPP OD Grad Seal Srl Gr Sea? Seat fra?
YAK would like to wish the Herd a shaggy Christmas_.. remember thet the Mutants are
coming back Real Soon Now __ has anyone else upur t from me and Wulf had Double-Om
on Iridis, yet? Has anyone completed it? Has anyone got more than 27,500 in
Starglider , or got any of the artifacts in Time Bandit? Does anyone know how to get
the Shepherd to give you a sheep in T_Bandit?? | want that sheep!!!

 

a a comes

aera eeeemeeneera mcateanalt had Bie
Semin Dene ee ‘

 

A Nature of the Beast has been reproduced |
RCNA LEE Ry aT a |
the gathering of May 2007 in OXford ,

hh
ee de

AO Minter ‘for YEARS

a of total blasting pleasure ... for without
the YaK none of this would have been
possible... YaK rules the zone...

 

